m: 


mm 


1 1 


*    I  I     '  'I  ''  •< 


PRINCETON,     N.     J. 


BL  1010  .S3  V.49 
Buddhist  Mah  ay  ana  texts 


THE 

SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST 


[49] 


iiOnbott 
HENRY    FROWDE 

Oxford  University  Press  Warehouse 
Amen  Corner,  E.C. 


(Hew  2)orR 

MACMILUAN  &   CO.,   66  FIFTH  AVENUE 


THE 


/ 

SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST 


TRANSLATED 


BY  VARIOUS  ORIENTAL  SCHOLARS 


AND    EDITED    BY 

F.    MAX    MULLER 


VOL.    XLIX 


AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS 
1894 

\_All  rights  reserved'] 


BUDDHIST  MAHAYANA  TEXTS 


PART    II 


THE    LARGER   SUKHAvATI-VYOhA 

THE   SMALLER   SUKHAVATI-VYOhA 

THE   VA6^RAA'A'/^EDIKA 

THE   LARGER 
PRA6'7V'A-PARAMITA-Hi?/DAYA-SCFTRA 

THE    SMALLER 

pra6^a^A-pAramitA-h^/daya-sutra 

TRANSLATED    BY    F.    MAX    MULLER 


THE  amitAyur-dhyAna-sOtra 

TRANSLATED    BV    J.    TAKAKUSU 


AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS 
1894 


CONTENTS   TO    PART    II. 


PACE 

Introduction v 

Translated  by  F.  Max  Miiller. 

1.  The  Larger  SuKHAvATf-vvOHA i 

Index  of  Words 77 

Index  of  Subjects 85 

2.  The  Smaller  SukhavatI-vyuha Sy 

Index  of  Names  and  Subjects 105 

Index  of  Sanskrit  Words 107 

3.  The  Vagraa-a'//edika 109 

4.  The  Larger  Prac.va-pAramita-h/c/daya-sOtra        .        .        .  145 

5.  The  Smaller  Pragaa-pAramita-h^/daya-sOtra      .        .        -151 

Index  of  Names  and  Subjects 155 

Index  of  Sanskrit  Words i57 

Translated  by  J.  Takakusu. 

6.  The  Amitayur-dhyAna-sOtra '59 

Index  of  Names  and  Subjects 203 


Transliteration   of  Oriental   Alphabets   adopted   for   the   Translations 

of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East ^06 


a  2 


INTRODUCTION. 


THE   LARGER  SUKHAVATi-VYUHA. 

According  to  the  census  of  189 1  Japan  has  about  forty 
millions  of  inhabitants,  of  whom  more  than  thirty  miUions 
are  Buddhists.  Of  these  Buddhists  the  Shin-shiu  sect 
claims  about  ten  millions  of  followers,  with  19,208  temples, 
and  11,958  preachers,  with  ten  chief  priests,  and  3,593 
students.  The  books  on  which  the  members  of  this  sect 
chiefly  found  their  faith  are  the  two  Sukhavati-vyuhas, 
the  large  and  the  small,  and  the  A m itay  u r-dhyana-sutra. 
They  are  sometimes  called  the  Large  Sutra,  the  Small  Siitra. 
and  the  Sutra  of  Meditation  ^. 

According  to  the  Buddhists  of  Japan,  Buddha  preached 
the  Amitayur-dhyana-sutra  to  queen  Vaidehi  in  the  city 
of  R^£-agrzha..  This  was  during  the  fifth  period  of  his  life  ; 
i.  e.  when  he  was  between  the  age  of  seventy-one  and 
seventy-nine. 

The  outline  given  of  this  Siitra  is  as  follows :  '  Vaidehi, 
consort  of  king  Bimbisara  of  Magadha,  seeing  the  wicked 
actions  of  her  son  A^dtai-atru,  began  to  feel  weary  of  this 
world  Saha  (here  as  elsewhere  explained  as  the  patient, 
much-enduring  earth).  5akyamuni  then  taught  her  how 
to  be  born  in  the  Pure  Land  Sukhavati,  instructing  her  in 
the  method  of  being  born  in  that  world,  enumerating  three 
kinds  of  good  actions.  The  first  is  worldly  goodness,  which 
includes  good  actions  in  general,  such  as  filial  piety,  respect 

'  See  Sukhavati-vyuha,  in  Anecdota  Oxoniensia,  p.  ix. 


VI  THE    LARGER    SUKHAVATl-VVUllA. 


for  ciders,  loyalty,  faithfulness,  &c.  The  second  is  the 
goodness  of  Sila.  or  morality,  in  which  there  are  differences 
between  the  priesthood  and  the  laity.  In  short,  however, 
all  who  do  not  oppose  the  general  rule  of  reproving  wicked- 
ness and  exhorting  to  the  practice  of  virtue  are  included  in 
this  goodness.  The  third  is  the  goodness  of  practice, 
which  includes  that  of  the  four  Satyas  or  truths,  and  the  six 
Paramitas  or  perfections.  Besides  these,  all  other  pure  and 
good  actions,  such  as  the  reading  and  recital  of  the 
Mahaydna-sutras,  persuading  others  to  hear  the  Law,  and 
thirteen  kinds  of  goodness  to  be  practised  by  fixed 
thought,  are  comprised  in  this.  Towards  the  end  of  the 
Sutra,  Buddha  says  :  "  Let  not  one's  voice  cease,  but  ten 
times  complete  the  thought,  and  repeat  the  words  Namo^mi- 
tdbhaya  Buddhaya,  or  adoration  to  Amitabha  Buddha. 
This  practice  is  the  most  excellent  of  all." 

'  At  seventy-eight  years  of  age  Buddha  is  said  ^  to  have 
composed  the  Samanta-bhadra-bodhisattva-ztarya-dharma- 
sutra,  in  the  city  of  Vaij-ali.  At  the  age  of  seventy-nine 
he  is  supposed  to  have  ascended  to  the  Trayastriw/ja 
heaven  in  order  to  preach  to  his  mother,  and  after 
descending  on  earth  again,  he  only  published  two  more 
SCltras,  the  Nirvdwa-sdtra  and  the  Sukhavati-vyuha.  Very 
soon  after  he  died.' 

The  same  three  books,  that  is,  the  two  Sukhavati-vyuhas 
and  the  AmitAyiir-dhyAna-sutra,  form  also  the  chief 
authority  of  the  Codoshiu  sect,  the  sect  of  the  Pure  Land. 
The  followers  of  this  sect  state"  that  in  the  }'ear  2^32  A.  D. 
Sarighavarman,  an  Indian  student  of  theTripi/aka,  came  to 
China  and  translated  the  great  Amit^yu//-sutra,  i.e.  the 
Larger  Sukhavati-vyuha,  in  two  volumes.  This  is  the  first 
and  largest  of  their  .sacred  books. 

In  the  year  400  A.  I),  another  teacher,  Kumara^iva,  came 
from    India  to   China,  and  produced  a  translation  of  the 


'  These  arc  the  statements  of  the  Buddhists  in  Japan  as  rccordcfl  by  Hiinyiu 
Nanjio  in  '  .Short  History  of  the  Twelve  Japanese  Buddhist  Sects,'  Tokyo,  1886, 
p.  xviii. 

'  I.oc.  cit.  p.  104. 


INTRODUCTION.  vii 


small  Amitayu/^-sutra,  or  Smaller  Sukhavati-vyuha,  in  one 
volume.     This  is  the  smallest  of  the  three  sacred  books. 

In  424  A.  D.  Kalayai-as  arrived  in  China  from  India,  and 
translated  the  Amitayur-dhyana-sutra  in  one  volume. 

Chinese  translations  of  these  texts  were  known  to  exist 
not  only  in  China,  but  also  in  Japan,  and  there  were  in 
several  cases  more  than  one  translation  of  the  same  text. 
But  it  was  not  known,  nor  even  suspected,  that  the  Sanskrit 
originals  of  some  of  them  had  been  preserved  in  the  temples 
and  monasteries  of  that  distant  island. 

In  the  year  j  880  I  read  a  paper  before  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society  in  London, '  On  Sanskrit  Texts  discovered  in  Japan  ' 
(Selected  Essays,  vol.  ii,  pp.  213-271),  and  in  it  and  in  the 
preface  to  my  edition  of  the  Sanskrit  texts  of  the  Sukhavati- 
vyuha  in  the  Anecdota  Oxoniensia,  1883,  I  explained  how 
I  discovered  the  existence  and  came  into  the  possession  of 
Sanskrit  MSS.  and  copies  of  Sanskrit  MSS.  from  the 
Buddhist  monasteries  in  Japan. 

I  had  long  suspected  the  existence  of  old  Sanskrit  MSS. 
in  China,  and  had  asked  my  friends  there  to  search  for 
them,  and  as  it  was  well  known  from  the  works  of  Sicbold 
and  others  that  there  were  short  invocations  in  Sanskrit  of 
Buddha  hung  up  in  the  Buddhist  temples  of  Japan  or 
written  on  their  walls.  I  entertained  a  hope  that  in  Japan 
also  some  real  and  ancient  MSS.  might  still  be  discovered. 
The  alphabet  in  which  these  short  invocations  are  written 
was  known  by  the  name  of  S h  i  d d  a,  the  Sanskrit  S  i  d  d  h a ' . 
It  may  be  seen  in  Siebold's  works  and  in  an  article 
published  in  1880  in  the  Annales  du  Musee  Guimet,  vol.  i, 
pp.  322-336,  by  MM.  Ymaizoumi  and  Yamata.  What  was 
not  known,  however,  was  that  there  had  been  a  period  in 


^  Siddham,  lit.  what  is  successfully  achieved,  seems  to  have  been  used  by 
Buddhists  like  siddhi^,  success,  as  an  auspicious  invocation  at  the  beginning 
of  literary  works.  Thus  we  see  that  the  alphabet  on  the  Horiuzhi  palm-leaves 
begins  with  siddham,  and  this  siddham  may  afterwards  have  become  the 
name  of  the  alphabet  itself.  In  Siddhanta,  meaning  dogma,  grammar,  siddha 
conveys  the  sense  of  settled ;  in  Siddhartha,  a  name  of  Buddha,  it  means  fulfilled, 
i.  e.  he  whose  desires  have  all  been  fulfilled,  the  perfect  man,  free  from  desires 
and  passions. 


viii  THE    LARGER    SUKHAVAtJ-VyOhA. 

the  history  of  Japan  when  Sanskrit  was  studied  systemati- 
cally by  native  priests,  nay,  that  some  of  the  MSS.  which 
had  travelled  from  India  to  China,  and  from  China  to  Japan 
were  still  in  existence  there.  Of  these  MSS.  I  gave  an 
account  in  1884  in  the  Anecdota  Oxonicnsia,  *  The  Ancient 
Palm-Leaves.'  Though  hitherto  no  new  discoveries  of 
Sanskrit  MSS.  have  been  made,  it  is  most  desirable  that  the 
search  for  them  should  not  be  given  up  in  China,  in  Japan, 
and  in  Corea  also.  But  even  thus  a  new  and  important 
chapter  has  been  added  to  the  history  of  Buddhism,  and 
the  fact  been  established  once  for  all  that  Buddhist  litera- 
ture found  a  home  in  Japan,  and  was  studied  there  for 
many  generations  not  only  in  Chinese  translations,  but  in 
the  original  Sanskrit  also.  Let  us  hope  that  through  the 
efforts  of  my  pupils,  such  as  Bunyiu  Nanjio,Kenjiu  Kasawara 
(died  1H83),  and  others,  a  new  school  of  Sanskrit  students 
has  been  planted  in  Japan  which  will  enable  the  followers  of 
Buddha  there  to  derive  their  knowledge  of  his  doctrine  from 
the  original  and  undefiled  source  of  the  ancient  Tripi/'aka. 

I  thought  it  best  for  the  sake  of  completeness,  and  in 
compliance  with  the  wishes  of  my  friends  in  Japan,  to  give 
in  this  volume  the  translation  both  of  the  Larger  and  the 
Smaller  Sukhavati-vyuha.  They  differ  from  each  other 
on  several  smaller  points.  The  Larger  Sukhavati-vyuha  is 
represented  as  having  been  preached  on  the  Gr/dhrakiVa 
hill  near  Ra^-agr^Tia,  the  Smaller  Sukhavati-vyflha  in  the 
^eta-grove  near  .S'ravasti.  In  the  former  the  chief  inter- 
locutors are  the  Bhagavat,  i.  e.  the  Buddha  5"akyamuni, 
Ananda,  and  A^ta ;  in  the  latter  the  Bhagavat  and  S&r'i- 
putra.  There  is  one  point,  however,  which  is  of  great 
importance  in  the  eyes  of  the  followers  of  the  Shin-shiu 
sect,  on  which  the  two  treatises  differ. 

The  Smaller  Sukhdvati-vyuha  lays  great  stress  on  the 
fact  that  people  can  be  saved  or  can  be  born  in  the  Land 
of  Bliss,  if  only  they  remember  and  repeat  the  name  of 
Buddha  Amitdbha  two,  three,  four,  five,  six  or  more  nights 
before  their  death,  and  it  distinctly  denies  that  people  are 
b(jrn  in  the  Paradise  of  Amitabha  as  a  reward  or  necessary 
result  of  good  works  performed  in  the  present  life.     This 


INTRODUCTION.  IX 


would  seem  to  take  away  one  of  the  fundamental  doctrines 
of  Buddhism,  namely  the  doctrine  of  karman,  or  of  the 
continuous  working  of  our  deeds  whether  good  or  bad. 
Instead  of  the  old  doctrine,  As  a  man  soweth,  so  he  shall 
reap,  a  new  and  easier  way  of  salvation  is  here  preached, 
viz.  As  a  man  prayeth,  so  he  shall  be  saved.  It  is  what  is 
known  to  us  as  salvation  by  faith  rather  than  by  works. 
The  Larger  Sukhavati-vyuha  lays  likewise  great  stress  on 
prayer  and  faith  in  Amitabha,  but  it  never  neglects  '  the 
stock  of  merit '  as  essential  for  salvation.  It  would 
almost  seem  as  if  this  popular  and  easy  doctrine  had 
secured  to  itself  the  name  of  Mahayana,  as  meaning  the 
Broad  Way,  in  opposition  to  the  Narrow  Way,  the 
Hinayana. 

The  historical  relation  between  the  Hinayana  and  the 
Mahayana  schools  of  Buddhism  is  to  me  as  great  a  puzzle  as 
ever.  But  that  the  teaching  of  vSakyamuni  as  represented  in 
the  Hinayana  comes  first  in  time  seems  to  be  shown  by  the 
Mahayana-sutras  themselves.  Even  in  our  Sukhavati-vyuha 
the  teacher,  the  Bhagavat,  is  5akyamuni,  whom  we  know  as 
the  son  of  the  Lord  of  Kapilavastu,  the  husband  of  Yaj-odhard, 
the  father  of  Rahula.  We  begin  with  a  dialogue  between  this 
Buddha  and  his  famous  disciple  Ananda.  Ananda  observes 
that  Buddha  is  in  a  state  of  spiritual  exaltation  and  asks  him 
what  he  is  seeing  or  thinking.  Thereupon  Buddha  relates 
how  there  was  a  line  of  eighty-one  Tathagatas  or  Buddhas 
beginning  with  Dipahkara  and  ending  with  Lokexvarara^a. 
During  the  period  of  this  Tathagata  Loke.yvarara^, 
a  Bhikshu  or  Buddhist  mendicant  of  the  name  of  Dharma- 
kara  formed  the  intention  of  becoming  a  Buddha.  He  there- 
fore went  to  the  Tathagata  Lokej-varara^a,  praised  him  in 
several  verses,  and  then  asked  him  to  become  his  teacher 
and  to  describe  to  him  what  a  Buddha  and  a  Buddha  country 
ought  to  be.  After  having  received  instruction,  Dharma- 
kara  comprehended  all  the  best  quahties  of  all  the  Buddha 
countries,  and  prayed  that  they  should  all  be  concentrated 
in  his  own  country  when  he  himself  had  become  a  Buddha. 
After  long  meditations  Dharmakara  returns  to  Buddha 
Loke.yvararara  and  tells  him   in  a  long  prayer  what   he 


THE    LARGER    SUKHAVATl-VvOlIA. 


wishes  and  wills  his  own  Buddha  country  to  be.  This 
prayer  forms  really  the  nucleus  of  the  Sukhavati-vyuha  ;  it 
is  in  fact,  under  the  form  of  a  prayer,  a  kind  of  prophecy  of 
what,  according  to  Dharmakara's  ideas,  Sukhavati  or  the 
Land  of  Bliss  ought  to  be.  Dharmakara  then  became 
a  l^odhisattva,  a  candidate  for  Buddhahood.and  lastly  a  real 
Buddha  (§  9).  All  this  is  related  by  Buddha  5akyamuni 
to  Ananda,  as  a  kind  of  vision  of  what  happened  ten 
kalpas  ago  (§  14,  s.  f,).  When  Ananda  asks  vSakyamuni 
what  has  become  of  this  Bodhisattva  Dharmakara,  Buddha 
answers  that  this  original  mendicant  is  now  reigning  in 
Sukhavati  as  the  Buddha  Amitabha.  He  then  proceeds 
to  describe  Sukhavati  where  Amitabha  dwells,  and  his 
description  of  Amitabha's  country  is  very  much  the  fulfilment 
of  all  that  Dharmakara  has  prayed  for.  Once  (§  17)  Ananda 
is  reproved  by  Buddha  for  not  implicitly  believing  all  he 
says  about  the  marvels  of  Sukhavati,  but  afterwards  the 
praises  of  Sukhavati  and  of  its  inhabitants  are  continued 
till  nearly  the  end.  In  some  verses  recited  by  Buddha 
^akyamuni,  Amitabha  himself,  when  questioned  by  the 
Buddha-son  Avalokite^vara,  explains  that  Sukhavati  is  what 
it  is  in  fulfilment  of  his  prayers,  when  he  was  as  )'et  living  on 
earth  (§§31,  13;  1 7).  At  last  Ananda  expresses  a  wish  to  see 
Amitabha,  whereupon  that  Buddha  sends  a  ray  of  light  from 
the  palm  of  his  hand  so  that  the  whole  world  was  inundated 
by  its  light,  and  not  only  Ananda,  but  every  living  being 
could  see  Amitabha  and  his  retinue  of  Bodhisattvas 
in  the  Land  of  Bliss,  while  they  in  Sukhavati  could  sec 
6"akyamuni  and  the  whole  world  Saha.  Then  begins  the 
conversation  between  6"akyamuni  and  A^^nta  (instead  of 
Ananda).  Buddha  explains  to  him  how  some  of  the 
blessed  spirits  in  Sukhavati  sit  cross-legged  in  lotus-flowers, 
while  others  dwell  shut  up  in  the  calyx  of  these  flowers, 
the  former  being  the  firm  believers  in  Amitabha,  the  latter 
those  who  have  entertained  some  doubt,  and  who  have 
therefore  to  wait  for  five  hundred  years  inside  the  calyx 
before  they  become  full-blown,  being  debarred  during  all 
that  time  from  seeing  and  hearing  the  Buddha. 

In  conclusion  Buddha  ^Akyamuni  exhorts  A^ita  to  teach 


INTRODUCTION.  XI 


this  treatise,  the  Sukhavati-vyuha,  to  all  beings,  and 
promises  great  rewards  to  all  who  will  learn  it,  copy  it, 
teach  and  explain  it. 

I  need  not  repeat  here  what  I  have  said  in  the  preface  to 
my  edition  of  the  Sanskrit  text  of  the  Sukhavati-vyuha 
about  the  difficulties  of  translating  a  text  which  in  many 
places  is  corrupt  and  imperfect.  But  I  may  point  out 
another  difficulty,  namely  how  almost  impossible  it  is  to 
find  in  English  a  sufficient  number  of  nouns  and  adjectives 
to  render  the  superabundant  diction  of  this  Description  of 
the  Land  of  Bliss.  An  exact  rendering  of  all  the  words  of 
its  gushing  eloquence  is  out  of  the  question.  Often  I  should 
have  liked  to  shorten  some  turgid  sentence,  but  I  was  afraid 
of  exposing  myself  once  more  to  the  frivolous  charge  of  re- 
presenting the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East  as  more  beautiful, 
as  more  free  from  blemishes,  than  they  really  are.  No 
more  unfounded  charge  could  have  been  brought  against 
these  translations  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East.  What- 
ever else  they  may  be  or  not  be,  they  are  certainly  faithful, 
as  faithful  as  an  English  translation  of  an  Oriental  original 
can  possibly  be.  That  they  are  free  from  mistakes,  I  should 
not  venture  to  say,  and  no  Oriental  scholar  would  expect 
it.  Those  who  venture  to  translate  Oriental  texts  that  have 
never  been  translated  before  are  few  in  number,  and  they 
have  to  do  the  work  of  pioneers.  Those  who  follow  in  their 
track  find  it  very  easy,  no  doubt,  to  do  over  again  what  has 
been  done  before,  and  even  to  point  out  here  and  there  what 
they  consider  and  represent  as  mistakes ;  nay,  they  evidently 
imagine  that  because  they  can  discover  a  mistake,  they 
themselves  could  have  done  the  pioneer's  work  as  well  or 
much  better.  If  only  they  would  try  for  once  to  find  their 
way  through  the  jungle  and  the  brushwood  of  an  unexplored 
forest  they  would  become  more  just  to  their  predecessors, 
and  more  humble  in  judging  of  their  own  performances. 
Nay,  they  might  possibly  find  that  often  when  they  differ 
from  the  translation  of  others,  they  themselves  may  be 
wrong,  and  their  precursors  right. 

This  at  all  events  I  may  say  in  my  own  name  and  in  the 
name  of  my  fellow-workers,  that  the  idea  of  representing 


Xii  THE    SMALLER    SUKHAVATi-VvOnA. 

the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East  as  better,  purer,  and  more 
beautiful  than  they  arc,  could  never  enter  into  the  head  of 
a  scholar,  and  has  never  proved  even  a  temptation  to  the 
translators  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East. 


THE    SMALLER   SUKHAVAT!-VY0HA. 

The  translation  of  the  Smaller  Sukhavati-vyuha  has  been 
published  by  me  before  in  my  Selected  Essays,  vol.  ii, 
p.  348,  where  a  fuller  account  may  be  found  of  the  dis- 
covery of  Sanskrit  MSS.  in  Japan,  and  of  the  way  by  which 
they  travelled  from  India  to  China,  and  from  China  to 
Japan.  I  have  made  a  few  corrections  in  my  translation, 
and  have  added  some  notes  and  omitted  others. 


THE   VAC^RAA-A'/ZEDHvA. 

In  order  to  make  this  collection  of  Mahayana  works  more 
complete  and  useful  to  students  in  Japan  I  have  added 
a  translation  of  the  Va^ra/'X-Z/cdika.  which  is  much  studied 
in  Japan,  and  the  Sanskrit  text  of  which  was  published  by 
me  in  an  editio  princeps — in  the  Anecdota  Oxoniensia, 
18S1. 

The  Va^ra^/r//edika,  or  the  Diamond-cutter,  is  one  of  the 
most  widely  read  and  most  highly  valued  metaphysical 
treatises  in  Buddhist  literature.  In  Japan  the  Va^raH7/r- 
dika  and  the  Pra^i,v7iiparamita-hr/daya  are  read  chiefly  by  the 
followers  of  the  Shin-gon  sect,  founded  by  K6-B6,  the  great 
disciple  of  the  famous  Hiouen-thsang,  in  816  A.  D.  The 
temples  of  this  sect  in  Japan  amount  to  12,943.  Written 
originally  in  Sanskrit,  it  has  been  translated  into  Chinese, 
Tibetan,  Mongol,  and  Mandshu.  Its  full  title  is  Vaj^raX'/7/e- 
dik^  I'r.-i^w.'i-paramit.'i,  i.e.  the  Diamond-cutter, the  perfection 
of  wisdom,  or,  as  it  has  .sometimes  been   rendered,  '  the 


INTRODUCTION.  XIU 


Transcendent  Wisdom.'  Mr.  Bunyiu  Nanjio  in  his  Cata- 
logue of  the  Tripi/aka,  p.  i,  has  shown  that  it  forms  the 
ninth  section  of  the  Mahapra^«a-paramit4-sutra,  and  that 
it  agrees  with  the  Tibetan  translation  of  the  text  in 
300  jlokas. 

An  account  of  the  Tibetan  translation  was  given  as  far 
back  as  1836  by  Csoma  Korosi  in  his  Analysis  of  the  Sher- 
chiu,  the  second  division  of  the  Kanjur,  published  in  the 
Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  xx,  p.  393  seq.  Our  text  is  there 
described  as  the  Diamond-cutter  or  the  Sutra  of  wonderful 
effects,  in  which  vSakya  in  a  colloquial  manner  instructs 
Subhuti,  one  of  his  principal  disciples,  in  the  true  meaning 
of  the  Pra^;7a-paramita.  The  Tibetans,  we  are  told,  pay 
great  respect  to  this  Sutra,  and  copies  of  it  are  found  in 
consequence  in  great  abundance  ^. 

The  first  Chinese  translation-  is  ascribed  to  Kuma- 
ra^iva  of  the  latter  Tsin  dynasty  (a.  D.  384-417).  An 
English  translation  of  this  Chinese  translation  was  published 
by  the  Rev.  S.  Beal  in  the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society,  1864-5. 

There  are  several  more  Chinese  translations,  one  by 
Bodhiru/^i  (a.  D.  509),  one  by  Paramartha  (a.  d.  562),  one 
by  Hiouen-thsang  (a.  D.  648),  one  by  I-tsing  (a.  D.  703), 
one  by  Dharmagupta  of  the  Sui  dynasty  (a.  d.  589-618). 

The  text  and  German  translation  of  the  Tibetan  transla- 
tion were  published  in  1837  by  M.  Schmidt  in  the 
Memoires  de  FAcademie  de  St.  Petersbourg,  tom.  iv, 
p.  186. 

The  Mongolian  translation  was  presented  by  the  Baron 
Schiling  de  Canstadt  to  the  Library  of  the  Institut  de 
France. 

The  Mandshu  translation  is  in  the  possession  of  M.  de 
Harlez,  who  with  the  help  of  the  Tibetan,  Mandshu,  and 
Chinese  versions  has  published  a  valuable  French  transla- 
tion of  the  Sanskrit  text  of  the  Va^aHV/edika  in  the 
Journal  Asiatique,   1892. 


'  See  also  L.  Feer  in  Annales  du  Musee  Guimet,  vol.  ii,  p.  201. 

^  See  preface  to  my  edition  of  the  Va^ra^Medika.  Anecd.  Oxon.,  i88i. 


XIV  THE    VAGUAX'^TT/EDTKA. 

At  first  sight  it  may  seem  as  if  this  metaphysical  treatise 
hardly  deserved  the  world-wide  reputation  which  it  has 
attained.  Translated  literally  into  English  it  must  often 
strike  the  Western  reader  as  sheer  nonsense,  and  hollow 
repetition.  Nor  can  anything  be  said  in  defence  of  the  form 
or  style  adopted  in  this  treatise  by  the  Buddhist  philosophers 
who  wished  to  convince  their  hearers  of  the  truth  of  their 
philosoph}'.  This  philosophy,  or,  at  least,  its  underlying 
doctrine,  is  not  unknown  to  us  in  the  history  of  Western 
philosophy.  It  is  simply  the  denial  of  the  reality  of  the 
phenomenal  world.  Considering  how  firmly  a  belief  in 
phenomenal  objects  is  established  in  the  ordinary  mind,  it 
might  well  have  seemed  that  such  a  belief  could  not  be 
eradicated  except  by  determined  repetition.  But  that  the 
theory  had  been  fully  reasoned  out  before  it  was  stated  in 
this  practical,  but  by  no  means  attractive  form,  may  be 
gathered  from  the  technical  terminology  which  pei^vades 
our  treatise.  There  arc  two  words,  in  particular,  which  are 
of  great  importance  for  a  right  apprehension  of  its  teach- 
ing, dharma  and  SAmgnk.  Dharma,  in  the  ordinary  Buddhist 
phraseology,  may  be  correctly  rendered  by  law.  Thus  the 
whole  teaching  of  Buddha  is  called  the  Good  Law,  Sad- 
dharma.  But  in  our  treatise  dharma  is  generally  used  in 
a  different  sense.  It  means  form  (ei5os),  and  likewise  what 
is  possessed  of  form,  what  is  therefore  different  from  other 
things,  what  is  individual,  in  fact,  what  we  mean  by  a  thing 
or  an  object.  This  meaning  has  escaped  most  of  the  trans- 
lators, both  Eastern  and  Western,  but  if  we  were  always  to 
translate  dharma  by  law,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  whole 
drift  of  our  treatise  would  become  unintelligible.  What 
our  treatise  wishes  to  teach  is  that  all  objects,  differing  one 
from  the  other  by  their  dharmas.  are  illusive,  or,  as  we 
should  say,  phenomenal  and  subjective,  that  they  are  in  fact 
of  our  own  making,  the  products  of  our  own  mind.  When 
we  say  that  something  is  large  or  small,  sweet  or  bitter,  these 
dharmas  or  qualities  are  subjective,  and  cannot  be  further 
defined.  What  is  large  to  me,  may  be  small  to  another. 
A  mile  may  seem  short  or  long,  according  to  the  state  of 
our  muscles,  and  no  one  can  determine  the  point  where 


INTRODUCTION.  XV 


smallness  ends  and  length  begins.  This  applies  to  all 
things  which  we  are  supposed  to  know,  that  is,  which  we 
are  able  to  name.  And  hence  the  Buddhist  metaphysician 
tells  us  that  all  things  are  but  names,  saw^/zas^,  and  that 
being  names  they  are  neither  what  they  seem  to  be  nor 
what  they  do  not  seem  to  be.  This  extreme  Pyrrhonism  is 
afterwards  applied  to  everything.  Dust  is  not  dust,  because 
we  cannot  draw  a  line  between  the  smallest  molecules,  the 
smallest  granules,  the  smallest  dust,  and  the  smallest 
gravel.  There  are  no  signs  (no  re/c/xj/pta  or  o/pteta)  by 
which  we  can  know  or  distinguish  these  objects.  There  are 
in  fact  no  objects,  independent  of  us  ;  hence  whoever  speaks 
of  things,  of  beings,  of  living  beings,  of  persons,  &c.,  uses 
names  only,  and  the  fact  that  they  are  names  implies  that 
the  normal  things  are  not  what  they  seem  to  be.  This, 
I  believe,  is  the  meaning  of  the  constantly  recurring  phrase  : 
What  is  spoken  of  as  '  beings,  beings  indeed '  that  was 
preached  or  called  by  Buddha  as  no-beings ;  that  is,  every 
name  and  every  concept  is  only  a  makeshift,  if  it  is  not 
altogether  a  failure  ;  it  is  certainly  not  true.  We  may  speak 
of  a  dog,  but  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  dog.  It  is  always 
either  a  greyhound  or  a  spaniel,  this  or  that  dog,  but 
dog  is  only  an  abstraction,  a  name,  a  concept  of  our 
mind.  The  same  applies  to  quadruped,  animal,  living 
being,  and  being ;  they  are  all  names  with  nothing 
corresponding  to  them.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  the 
highest  perfect  knowledge,  in  which  nothing,  not  even  the 
smallest  thing,  is  known,  or  known  to  be  known  (par.  22). 
In  that  knowledge  there  is  no  difference,  it  is  always  the 
same  and  therefore  perfect  (par.  23).  He  who  has  attained 
this  knowledge  believes  neither  in  the  idea,  i.  e,  the  name  of 
a  thing,  nor  in  the  idea  of  a  no-thing,  and  Buddha  by  using 
the  expression,  the  idea,  or  name  (sa;//^;7a)  of  a  thing, 
implies  thereby  that  it  is  not  the  idea  of  a  thing  (par.  31). 
This  metaphysical  Agnosticism  is  represented  as  perfectly 
familiar  even  to  children  and  ignorant  persons  (par.  30), 


'  SaMo/la.   and    d harm  a    correspond    in   many  respects   to   the  Vedantic 
n  a  m  a  r  u  p  e. 


XVI  THE    VAGRAA'A'WEDIKA. 

and  if  it  was  meant  to  be  so,  the  endless  repetition  of  the 
same  process  of  reasonini^  may  find  its  explanation. 

That  this  extreme  scepticism  or  Pyrrhonism  is  really  the 
popular  view  of  the  present  followers  of  the  Mahayana  Bud- 
dhism, was  clearly  stated  at  the  Congress  of  Religions,  held  in 
Chicago,  in  September,  1893.  A  Deputy  sent  by  the  leading 
sects  in  Japan,  submitted  to  the  Congress  an  outline  of  the 
doctrines  of  the  Mahayana  Buddhists  drawn  up  by  Mr.  S. 
Kuroda.  This  outline  had  been  carefully  examined  and 
approved  by  scholars  belonging  to  six  of  the  Buddhist  sects 
in  Japan,  and  was  published  with  authority  at  Tokyo  in  1 893. 
This  is  what  he  writes  of  the  Mahaj-ana  metaphysics  : 

'  The  distinction  between  pure  and  impure  is  made  by 
the  mind ;  so  are  also  all  the  changes  in  all  things  around 
us.  All  things  that  are  produced  by  causes  and  conditions, 
are  inevitably  destined  to  extinction.  There  is  nothing 
that  has  any  reality  ;  when  conditions  come  things  begin 
to  appear,  when  conditions  cease  these  things  likewise  cease 
to  exist.  Like  the  foam  of  the  water,  like  the  lightning 
flash,  and  like  the  floating,  swiftly  vanishing  clouds  they 
are  only  of  momentary  duration  ^  As  all  things  have  no 
constant  nature  of  their  own,  so  there  is  no  actuality  in 
pure  and  impure,  rough  and  fine,  large  and  small,  far  and 
near,  knowablc  and  unknowable,  &c.  On  this  account  it  is 
sometimes  said  that  all  things  arc  nothing.  The  apparent 
phenomena  around  us  are,  however,  produced  by  mental 
operations  within  us,  and  thus  distinctions  are  established. 

'  These  distinctions  produced  by  mental  operations  are, 
however,  caused  by  fallacious  reasoning  nurtured  by  the 
habits  of  making  distinctions  between  ego  and  non-ego, 
good  and  bad,  and  by  ignorance  of  the  fact  that  things 
have  no  constant  nature  of  their  own  and  are  without 
distinctions  (when  things  thought  of  have  no  corresponding 
reality,  such  thinking  is  called  fallacious.  It  may  be 
compared  to  the  action  of  the  ignorant  monkey  that  tries 
to  catch  the  image  of  the  moon  upon  water).  Owing  to 
this  fallacious  reasoning,  a  variety  of  phenomena  constantly 

'  Cf.  Vn^ra*AAcdika,  par.  32. 


INTRODUCTION.  XVll 


appear  and  disappear,  good  and  bad  actions  are  done,  and 
the  wanderings  through  the  six  ways  or  states  of  Hfe  are 
thus  caused  and  maintained. 

'All  things  are  included  under  subject  and  object.  The 
subject  is  an  entity  in  which  mental  operations  are 
awakened  whenever  there  are  objects,  while  the  object 
consists  of  all  things,  visible  and  invisible,  knowable  and 
unknowable,  &c.  The  subject  is  not  something  that 
occupies  some  space  in  the  body  alone,  nor  does  the 
object  exist  outside  of  the  subject.  The  innumerable 
phenomena  of  subject  and  object,  of  ego  and  non-ego,  are 
originated  by  the  influence  of  fallacious  thinking,  and 
consequently  various  principles,  sciences,  and  theories  are 
produced. 

'  To  set  forth  the  principle  of  "  Vidyamatra  "  (all  things 
are  nothing  but  phenomena  in  mind),  phenomena  of  mind 
are  divided  into  two  kinds  : — "  Gosshiki  "  (unknowable)  and 
"  Fumbetsujishiki "  (knowable).  They  are  also  divided  into 
eight  kinds: — i.  i^akshur-vi^;7ana  (mental  operations 
depending  on  the  eye),  2.  6"rotra-vi^77ana  (those  depending 
on  the  ear),  3.  Ghra;/a-vi^;7ana  (those  depending  on  the 
olfactory  organs),  4.  6^ihva-vi^;?ana  (those  depending  on 
the  taste),  5.  Kaya-vi^«ana  (those  depending  on  the 
organs   of  touch),   6.  Manovi^;7ana  (thinking  operations), 

7.  Klish/a-mano-vi^/zana  (subtile  and  ceaseless  operations), 

8.  Alaya-vi^«ana  (all  things  come  from  and  are  contained 
in  this  operation  ;  hence  its  name,  meaning  receptacle). 

'  According  to  the  former  division,  the  various  pheno- 
mena which  appear  as  subjects  and  objects  are  divided  into 
two  kinds : — the  perceptible  and  knowable,  the  imper- 
ceptible and  unknowable.  The  imperceptible  and  unknow- 
able phenomena  are  called  "  Gosshiki,"  while  the  perceptible 
and  knowable  phenomena  are  called  "Fumbetsujishiki." 
Now  what  are  the  imperceptible  and  unknowable  pheno- 
mena? Through  the  influence  of  habitual  delusions,  bound- 
less worlds,  innumerable  varieties  of  things  spring  up  in  the 
mind.  This  boundless  universe  and  these  subtile  ideas  are 
not  perceptible  and  knowable ;  only  Bodhisattvas  believe, 
understand,  and  become  perfectly  convinced  of  these 
[49]  '"'b 


XVlll  THE    VAGRAKKHEDIKA. 

through  the  contemplation  of  "  Vidyamatra  ;  "  hence  they 
are  called  imperceptible  and  unknowable.  What  are  the 
knowable  and  perceptible  phenomena  ?  Not  knowing  that 
these  imperceptible  and  unknow^able  phenomena  are  the 
productions  of  their  own  minds,  men  from  their  habitual 
delusions  invest  them  with  an  existence  outside  of  mind,  as 
perceptible  mental  phenomena,  as  things  visible,  audible, 
&c.  These  phenomena  are  called  perceptible  and  know- 
able.  Though  there  are  thus  two  kinds,  perceptible  and 
imperceptible  phenomena,  they  occur  upon  the  same 
things,  and  are  inseparably  bound  together  even  in  the 
smallest  particle.  Their  difference  in  appearance  is  caused 
only  by  differences  both  in  mental  phenomena,  and  in  the 
depth  of  conviction.  Those  who  know  only  the  perceptible 
things  without  knowing  the  imperceptible,  are  called  the 
unenlightened  by  Buddha.  Of  the  eight  mental  operations, 
the  eighth,  Alaya-vi^«ana,  has  reference  to  the  imperceptible, 
while  the  first  six  (sic)  refer  to  the  perceptible  phenomena. 
All  these,  however,  are  delusive  mental  phenomena. 

'  In  contradistinction  to  the  fallacious  phenomena,  there 
IS  the  true  essence  of  mind.  Underlying  the  phenomena  of 
mind,  there  is  an  unchanging  principle  which  we  call  the 
essence  of  mind  ;  the  fire  caused  by  fagots  dies  when  the 
fagots  are  gone,  but  the  essence  of  fire  is  never  destroyed. 
The  essence  of  mind  is  the  entity  without  ideas  and  without 
phenomena,  and  is  alwaj-s  the  same.  It  pervades  all  things, 
and  is  pure  and  unchanging.  It  is  not  untrue  or  change- 
able, so  it  is  also  called  "  Bhutatathata "  (permanent 
reality). 

'  The  essence  and  the  phenomena  of  mind  are  inseparable; 
and  as  the  former  is  all-pervading  and  ever-existing,  so 
the  phenomena  occur  everywhere  and  continually,  wherever 
suitable  conditions  accompany  it.  Thus  the  perceptible 
and  imperceptible  phenomena  arc  manifestations  of  the 
essence  of  mind  that,  according  to  the  number  and  nature 
of  conditions,  develop  without  restraint.  All  things  in  the 
universe,  therefore,  are  mind  itself.  By  this  we  do  not  mean 
that  all  things  combine  into  a  mental  unity  called  mind, 
nor  that  all  things  arc  emanations  from  it,  but  that  without 


INTRODUCTION,  XIX 


changing  their  places  or  appearance,  they  are  mind  itself 
everywhere.  Buddha  saw  this  truth  and  said  that  the 
whole  universe  was  his  own.  Hence  it  is  clear  that  where 
the  essence  of  mind  is  found,  and  the  necessary  conditions 
accompany  it,  the  phenomena  of  mind  never  fail  to  appear. 
So  the  essence  of  mind  is  compared  to  water,  and  its 
phenomena  to  waves.  The  water  is  the  essence,  the  waves 
are  the  phenomena  ;  for  water  produces  waves  when  a  wind 
of  sufficient  strength  blows  over  its  surface.  The  waves, 
then,  are  the  phenomena,  the  water  is  the  essence  ;  but 
both  are  one  and  the  same  in  reality.  Though  there  is 
a  distinction  between  the  essence  and  the  phenomena  of 
mind,  yet  they  are  nothing  but  one  and  the  same  substance, 
that  is,  mind.  So  we  say  that  there  exists  nothing  but  mind. 
Though  both  the  world  of  the  pure  and  impure,  and  the 
generation  of  all  things,  are  very  wide  and  deep,  yet  they 
owe  their  existence  to  our  mind.  Men,  however,  do  not 
know  what  their  own  minds  are ;  they  do  not  clearly  see 
the  true  essence,  and,  adhering  to  their  prejudices,  they 
wander  about  between  birth  and  death.  They  are  like 
those  who,  possessing  invaluable  jewels,  are,  nevertheless, 
suffering  from  poverty.  Heaven  and  hell  are  but  waves  in 
the  great  sea  of  the  universe  ;  Buddhas  and  demons  are  not 
different  in  their  essence.  Let  us,  therefore,  abide  in  the 
true  view  and  reach  the  true  comprehension  of  the  causality 
of  all  things.' 

I  hope  that  this  will  justify  the  view  I  have  taken  of  the 
Ya^rakk/iediksL,  and  that  my  translation,  though  it  differs 
considerably  from  former  translations,  will  be  found  to 
be  nearest  to  the  intentions  of  the  author  of  this  famous 
metaphysical  treatise. 


-'■  b  2 


XX         THE  pragaa-paramita-ii/?/dava-sCtra. 


THE  PRA6^7VA-PARAMITA-H7?/DAYA- 
SUTRA. 

(THE  LARGER  AND  THE  SMALLER  TEXT.) 

As  the  short  text  and  translation  of  these  Sutras  were  pub- 
h'shed  in  the  Anecdota  Oxoniensia,  1884,  with  Introduction 
and  full  notes,  I  did  not  at  first  intend  to  include  them  in 
this  volume.  But  as  I  was  told  that  this  Sutra  is  really 
the  most  widely  read  Buddhist  text  in  Japan,  to  be  seen 
everywhere  on  shrines,  temples  and  monasteries,  more 
admired,  it  may  be,  than  understood  by  the  Buddhist  laity, 
I  yielded  to  the  wishes  of  my  Buddhist  friends,  and  have 
reprinted  it  so  as  to  make  this  volume  a  really  complete 
repository  of  all  the  important  sacred  texts  on  which 
Buddhism  takes  its  stand  in  Japan.  We  have  heard  so 
much  of  late  of  a  Buddhist  propaganda  for  the  conversion 
of  the  East  and  the  West  to  the  doctrines  of  Buddha,  that 
it  may  be  useful  to  see  what  the  doctrines  of  the  historical 
Buddha  have  become  in  the  Mahayana-school,  more  parti- 
cularly in  the  monasteries  of  Japan. 


THE  amitAyur-dhyAna-sOtra. 

As  I  did  not  succeed  in  getting  possession  of  a  MS.  of  the 
original  Sanskrit  text  of  this  SCltra,  I  had  given  up  all  hope 
of  being  able  to  give  in  this  volume  a  translation  of  all 
the  classical  texts  used  by  the  two  leading  sects  of  the 
Buddhists  in  Japan.  Fortunately  at  the  last  moment  a 
young  Japanese  scholar  who  is  reading  Sanskrit  with  me  at 
Oxford,  Mr.  J.  Takakusu,  informed  me  that  he  possessed 
the  Chinese  translation  of  this  Sutra,  and  that  he  felt  quite 
competent  to  translate  it.  It  so  happens  that  the  style  of 
this  Sutra  is  very  simple,  so  that  there  is  less  fear  of  the 
Chinese  translator,  Kiilayajas,  having  misunderstood  the 
Sanskrit  original.      But  though  I  feel  no  doubt  that  this 


INTRODUCTION.  XXI 


translation  from  the  Chinese  gives  us  on  the  whole  a  true 
idea  of  the  Sanskrit  original,  I  was  so  much  disappointed 
at  the  contents  of  the  Sutra,  that  I  hesitated  for  some  time 
whether  I  ought  to  publish  it  in  this  volume. 

What  determined  me  at  last  to  do  so  was  partly  the  wish 
of  my  friends  in  Japan  who  expected  a  complete  translation 
of  their  three  sacred  books,  partly  my  own  wish  that  nothing 
should  be  suppressed  that  might  lead  us  to  form  a  favour- 
able or  unfavourable,  if  only  a  correct  judgment  of  Buddhism 
in  its  Mahayana  dress,  as  professed  by  millions  of  people 
in  China  and  Japan. 

What  gives  to  these  Sutras  their  highest  interest  in  the 
eyes  of  Sanskrit  scholars  is  their  date,  which  can  be  deter- 
mined with  considerable  certainty.  Those  who  know  how 
few  certain  dates  there  are  in  the  history  of  Sanskrit  literature 
will  welcome  these  Mahayana  Sutras  as  a  new  sheet-anchor 
in  the  chronology  of  Sanskrit  literature.  We  have  as  yet 
only  three,  the  date  of  /iTandragupta  (Sandrokyptos)  as  fixed 
by  Greek  historians,  and  serving  to  determine  the  dates  of 
Aj-oka  and  his  inscriptions  in  the  third,  and  indirectly  of 
Buddha  in  the  fifth  century.  The  second  was  supplied  by 
Hiouen-thsang's  travels  in  India,  629-645  A.  D.,  and  the  third 
by  I-tsing's  travels  in  India  in  the  years  671-690  A.  D. 

I  was  able  to  show  in  my  lectures  on  '  India,  what  can  it 
teach  us?'  delivered  at  Cambridge  in  1882,  that  Hiouen- 
thsang,  while  in  India,  had  been  the  pupil  of  G^ayasena  and 
Mitrasena,  which  supplied  scholars  with  a  fixed  date  for 
the  literary  activity  of  Gu/^aprabha,  Vasubandhu,  and  their 
contemporaries  and  immediate  predecessors  and  successors. 
Still  more  important  was  the  date  which  I-tsing  supplied 
for  BhartrAari  and  the  literary  period  in  which  he  moved. 
Bhartr/hari's  death,  fixed  by  I-tsing  at  650  A.  D.,  has  served 
as  a  rally ing-point  for  a  number  of  literary  men  belonging 
to  what  I  called  the  Renaissance  of  Sanskrit  literature. 

I  pointed  out  at  the  same  time  that  the  period  between 
the  end  of  the  Vedic  literature,  represented  in  its  last  efforts 
by  the  numerous  Sutra- works,  and  the  beginning  of  the 
Renaissance  in  the  fourth  century  A.  D.,  would  have  to  be 
filled   to   a  great  extent   by  Buddhist  works.      I  hardly 

*b3 


Xxii  THE    AMITAYUK-DHVANA-S^^TRA. 

thought  then  that  MahayAna  texts  like  the  Sukhavati- 
vyuha,  which  seemed  to  be  of  so  secondary  a  character, 
would  claim  a  foremost  place  in  that  period.  But  there 
can  be  little  doubt  that  the  first  Chinese  translation  of  it 
by  Lokaraksha  was  made  between  the  years  147-186  A.  D.  ; 
the  second  by  K' K/iien  between  223-253  A.  D.  ;  and 
the  third  and  best  by  Saiighavarman,  an  Indian  6'rama;/a 
of  Tibetan  origin,  in  252  A.  D.,  whereas  the  first  translation 
of  a  Sanskrit  text  into  Chinese,  that  of  the  Sutra  in  forty- 
two  sections  by  Kajyapa  Matanga,  is  ascribed  to  the  year 
67  A.D.  I  need  hardly  say  that  there  are  no  Sanskrit  texts 
the  date  of  which  can  be  fixed  with  so  much  certainty  as 
those  of  the  Sanskrit  originals  of  the  Chinese  translations. 

The  doctrine  of  Amitabha  and  his  paradise  Sukhavati 
seems  to  have  acquired  great  popularity  in  China  and  after- 
wards in  Japan.  We  need  not  wonder  when  we  see  how 
easy  salvation  was  made  by  it,  particularly  according  to  the 
teaching  of  the  Smaller  Sukhavati-vyuha  and  the  Amitayur- 
dh>-ana-sutra. 

The  Buddhists  who,  as  I  have  pointed  out  on  several 
occasions,  are  the  debtors  of  the  Brahmans  in  almost  all 
their  philosophical  speculations,  seem  to  me  to  have 
borrowed  also  their  half-mythological  conception  of  Sukhd- 
vati  or  the  Land  of  Bliss  from  the  same  source.  In  the 
Vishwu  and  other  Pura;/as,  when  the  cities  of  the  Lokapala- 
gods  are  mentioned,  in  the  different  quarters  of  the  sky, 
the  city  of  Varu;/a  is  placed  in  the  West,  and  it  is  called 
Mukhya,  the  cliief,  or  Sukha,  the  happy,  or  NimloX'ani,  the 
city  of  sunset.  This  Sukha  is,  I  think,  the  prototype  of 
Sukhavati  ^  Though  it  would  be  rash  to  conclude  that 
therefore  the  Puraz/as,  as  we  now  possess  them,  because 
they  mention  the  Land  of  Bliss  or  Sukhd,  must  be  older 
than  our  text  of  the  Sukhavati,  say  100  A.  D.,  we  may  say 
that  Paura;/ik  legends  must  certainly  have  existed  at  that 
early  time,  and  this  is  a  matter  of  some  importance.  I  have 
not  found  any  I^rahnianic  antecedents  of  Avalokitejvara, 

'  See  .ilso  Anandngiri  on  .9ankara'b  commentary  on  the  A7iandog)'a-upanish.id, 
III,  10,  4,  c<l.  Cnlc.  p.  172. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXUl 


but  the  occurrence  of  his  name  in  the  Sukhavati-vyuha 
shows  that  he  was  known  much  earHer  than  is  commonly- 
supposed,  that  is  about  loo  A.  D. 

In  Japan,  where  Buddhism  was  introduced  by  way  of 
Corea  in  552  A.  D.,  we  hear  of  the  Sukhavati-vyuha  for  the 
first  time  in  640  A.  D.,  when  the  emperor  Jomci  held 
a  reh'gious  service  at  his  palace  to  hear  an  exposition  of  the 
Sutra  on  Sukhavati  from  the  lips  of  Ye-yin,  a  vSramawa 
invited  from  China.  Many  works  were  composed  in  Japan 
as  well  as  in  China  on  Amitabha  and  his  Paradise,  as  may 
be  seen  from  the  Catalogue  of  the  Chinese  Tripi/aka, 
published  by  my  friend  and  former  pupil  Bunyiu  Nanjio 
in  1883  (Clarendon  Press). 

I  have  to  thank  Dr.  Winternitz  and  Mr.  Takakusu  for 
their  kind  help  in  preparing  the  indices  and  reading  the 
proof-sheets  of  this  volume. 

F.   MAX    MULLER. 


Oxford  : 
Jan.  26,  i< 


The  following  List  of  Buddhist  Texts,  translated  in  the 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  may  be  useful  to  students  in 
China  and  J  a  tan  : 

Sanskrit  Title.  Chinese  Title. 

Translated  into  Chinese 
by  Dharmaraksha,  A.  u.  420. 
From  Chinese  into  Enf,'lish 
by  S.  Beal,  Fo-sho-hing-lsan- 
king,  S.B.  E.,  vol.  -xi.x. 


I.  Buddha>tarita  (-kavya), 
'  Life  of  Buddha,'  a  poem,  by 
An-aghosha,  of  India.  See 
Anccdota  Oxonicnsia,  Aryan 
Series,  vol.  i,  part  vii,  1S93. 
Translated  by  E.  B.  CowcU, 
S.  B.  E.,  vol.  xlix. 


I I .  Larger  Sukhavat  1 
(-vyiiha), '  The  Land  of  Bliss.' 
Sec  Anccdota  Oxoniensia, 
Aryan  Series,  vol.  i,  part  ii, 
I^S3.  Translation  by  F.  Max 
.MiiUer,  S.B.E.,  vol.  xlix. 

III.  Smaller  Sukhavati 
(-vyuha).  See  Appendix  to 
the  (Larger)  Sukhavati,  Ancc- 
dota Oxoniensia,  also  Max 
Miilier's  Selected  Essays,  pp. 
34S-36J.  Translation  by  F. 
.Max  .MUller,  S.  B.  E.,  vol.  xlix. 

IV.  \\.5,Ta/t-(7;edika,  '  The 
Diamond-cutter.'  See  Ancc- 
dota Oxoniensia,  Ar)aii  Series, 
vol.  i,  part  i,  1881.  Trans- 
lation by  F.  Max  MiiUer, 
S.  B.  E.,  vol.  xlix. 


V.  Pra^/la  -  piiramita -  hri- 
daya  (two  texts,  shorter  and 
fuller).  Sec  Anccdota  Oxoni- 
ensia, Aryan  Series,  vol.  i,  part 
iii.  Translation  by  F.  Max 
-Muller,  S.  B.  E.,  vol.  xlix. 


VI.  Amitayur-dhyana- 
sfitrn, '  Metlitation  on  Buddha 
.\mitayus.'  For  this,  sec 
.\nccdota  Oxoniensia,  Aryan 
.Scries,  vol.  i,  part  ii,  Intro- 
duction, ix.  Translated  by 
I    lA-ikuM,  S  1!  E.,  vol.  xlix. 


:kM 


Translated  into  Chinese  by 
Sanghavarman,  A.  D.  252. 
The  chief  of  the  three  Sutras 
of  the  Pure  Land  sects  in 
China  and  Japan. 

Translated  by  Kumara- 
^va,  A.  D.  402.  Into  French, 
by  Imaizumi  and  Yamata, 
Annates  M.  G.,  vol.  ii,  1881. 


m  %'  m 

lis 


Translated  by  Kumara^va, 
A.D.  384-41 7.  From  Chinese 
into  English,  by  S.  Beal,  J.  R. 
A.  S.,  1864-65,  Art.  I.  Into 
French,  by  Mons.C.dellarlez, 
1892.  Translation  by  F.Max 
Miiller,  S.  B.  E,,  vol.  xlix. 

m.  ^  't^  m 

1.  By  Kumara^'iva(No.  19), 
A. 11.400.  2.By  Hiouen-thsang 
l^No.  20),  A.U.649.  3.  BySh'- 
hu,  A.I).  980-1000  (No.  936). 
4.  By  V\iig>ia.,  A.  u.  785-810. 
The  most  popular  text ,  but  not 
found  in  the  India  Oflice  col- 
lection. Translation  by  F.Max 
Miiller,  S.  B.  E  ,  vol.  xlix. 

t/3i  U  ill;  ^  m 

'i'r.inslated  by  Kalayajas. 
A.  n.  424,only  translation  that 
exists. 


Number    in     the    Cata- 
logue OFTHETRIPirAKA'. 

No.  1351  ;  another  of  the 
same  name  No.  680.  To  be 
found  in  the  India  Office  and 
the   Bodleian  Librar)'.     The 

Nishi-HongAvanji   \y^  ^^ 

l)fr  )  Library  possesses  a  very 

good  separate  copy. 

No.  27;  for  comparison  of 
the  five  existing  texts  ,out  of 
twelve)  see  Anccdota  Oxoni- 
ensia, vol.  i,  part  ii,  Introduc- 
tion, vii  seq. 


No.  200 ;  another  of  the 
same  name  by  A"A'^ien,  i.  e. 
No.  26. 


No.  10;  another  of  the 
same  name  by  Bodhiru/ti,  i.  e. 
No.  1 1  ;  and  many  others 
under  different  names. 


No.  1 98  ;  another  lost. 


I'ublished  by  Bunyiu  Nanjio  (Clarendon  Press,  1883). 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXV 


Other  Buddhist  Texts  translated  in  the  Sacred 
Books  of  the  East: 


Sanskrit  Title. 

Dhammapada,  by  F.  Max  Miiller, 
vol.  X.     Sutta-Nipata,  by  Fausboll. 


Buddhist  Suttas,  by  Rhys   Davids, 
vol.  xi. 

1.  Mahaparinibbana  Suttanta. 

2.  Dhamma-yfcakka-ppavattana. 

3.  Tevi^a  Suttanta, 

4.  Akahkeya  Sutta. 

5.  Aetokhila  Sutta. 

6.  Mahasudassana  Suttanta. 

7.  Sabbasava  Sutta. 


Vinaya  Texts,  by  Rhys  Davids  and 
Oldenberg,  vol.  xiii. 

1.  The  Patimokkha. 

2.  The  Mahavagga. 


Vinaya  Texts,  by  Rhys  Davids  and 
Oldenberg,  vol.  xvii. 

1.  The  Mahavagga. 

2.  The  AuUavagga. 

VinayaTexts  ( Aullavagga),  by  Rhys 
Davids  and  Oldenberg,  vol.  xx. 

Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king,      '  Life      of 
Buddha,'  by  S.  Beal,  vol.  xix. 

Saddharmapuw^arika, '  Lotus  of  the 
True  Law,'  by  Kern,  vol.  xxi. 


Milinda  Prajna,  '  Questions  of  King 
Milinda.'  From  Pali,  by  Rhys  Davids, 
vols.  XXXV  and  xxxvi. 


Chinese  Title. 

Nos.  1321,  1353, 1365,  1439.  Some 
parts  of  Max  M tiller's  translation  Vfere 
retranslated  into  Japanese  by  S.  Kato, 
Nanjio's  pupil. 

■■  :kmmmm 

Nos.  113,  114,  115,  120,  123,  118, 
119,  552,  though  they  do  not  agree. 

Nos.  657,  65S. 

3-    H  m  ii 
5.    ;\!>  .§,  m. 

^-  mmmm 
- « aft  *  *  « 

See  No.  1108.  Cf.  also  mo  and 
1160. 

-  A  #  gP 

-  ^h  %  gP 

A- 1-  gf 

1^  m  n  m  m 

No.  135 1,  also  680.    See  above. 


Nos.  134,  136,  1 38,  139.  It  is  this 
book  which  gave  birth  to  a  Japanese 
sect  called  Nichiren — the  number  of 
temples  being  about  5,000.  It  is  also 
read  by  many  other  sects.  Into  French 
by  Julien  ;  the  same  from  Sanskrit  by 
Bumouf. 

No.  1358.  Very  interesting  dia- 
logue between  Greek  King  Menander 
and  Bhikshu  Nagasena.  The  Pali 
text  is  far  more  interesting  and  fuller 
than  the  Chinese. 


XXVI  INTRODUCTION. 


Sacked  Books  of  China : 

Sacred  Books   of  China,  Texts  of  -^r   tf7?r     ^i.  ^ttT     y-  ^tt 

Confucianism,  by  James  Legge,  vol.  iii.  IS    'PjC'    P^   'viC.'   "f^  'Fjc 

Sacred    Books  of  China,    Texts  of  EI    ^ttt 

Confucianism,  by  James  Legge,    vol.  '^^  'r:C. 
xvi. 

Sacred  Books   of  China,  Texts  of  iri;^   =p 

Confucianism,  by  James  Legge,  vols.  '  ^    '^'^ 
xxvii  and  xxviii. 

Sacred   Books   of  China,  Texts  of  ^    JZ.    r^    ^ffe    jg^     ^ 

Taoism,  by  [ames  Legge,  vols,  xxxix  ''^^      "'       ^ —     ''^^    '^         ^'•'^ 

and   xl.     'Tlic  doctrine   of  Tao,    its  -^  ^    -fr     h    lafe    Rli    ^H^ 

ence,  and  its  relation  J^  "El '  V'V  -L   ^SV   ^i^-    Jmi » 


history,  its  influence, 

to  the   other  two  religions  of  China       y^  yaft  ^T??     IJ^   ^JjC  J^^     "TT 

are  fully  treated  in  these  volumes.  i™    •"'^    ^^'  '^^     'T^  T^^'   -I^ 

ti  If,  13  ji  II,  #  m 

#  if  ife  ^  ^  «  m 

;•"  SI  ^  ai  "F-,  iij  ^ 

gp.      I-egge's  translation  practically 
includes  all  the  evidenc<.s  of  ^j     B& 

M.  ?lJ  ^,  II  IP  ^,  "'- 


THE     LARGER 

SUKHAVATI-VYUHA. 


THE     LARGER 

SUKHAVATI-VYUHA. 

DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVATI, 

THE  LAND  OF  BLISS. 

Cm.  Adoration  to  the  Three  Treasures!  Cm. 
Adoration  to  all  the  glorious  Buddhas  and  Bodhi- 
sattvas  !     Adoration  to  all  Buddhas,  Bodhisattvas, 

A 

Aryas,  ^'ravakas,  and  Pratyekabuddhas,  past,  pre- 
sent, and  to  come,  who  dwell  in  the  unlimited  and 
endless  Lokadhatus  of  the  ten  quarters !  Adora- 
tion to  Amitabha !  Adoration  to  him  whose  soul 
is  endowed  with  incomprehensible  virtues ! 
Adoration  to  Amitabha,  to  the  6^ina,  to  thee,  O 

Muni ! 
I  go  to  Sukhavati  through  thy  compassion  also ; 
To  Sukhavati,  with  its  groves,  resplendent  with  gold, 
The  delightful,  adorned  with  the  sons  of  Sugata, — 
I  go  to  it,  which  is  full  of  many  jewels  and  treasures ; 
And  the  refuge  of  thee,  the  famous  and  wise. 


}  I.  Thus  it  was  heard  by  me.  At  one  time  the 
Bhagavat^  dwelt  in  Ra^agr/ha,  on  the  mountain 
Gr/dhraku/a,  with   a  large   assembly  of  Bhikshus, 

*  The  Blessed,  i.  e.  Buddha  .Sakyamuni. 
[49]  *Ii 


2  DESCRIPTION    OF   SUKHAVAtI,  §  r. 

with  thirty-two  thousands  of  Bhikshus,  all  holy 
(arhat),  free  from  frailties  and  cares,  who  had  per- 
formed their  religious  duties,  whose  thoughts  had 
been  thoroughly  freed  through  perfect  knowledge, 
with  inquiring  thoughts,  who  had  broken  the  fetters 
of  existence,  who  had  obtained  their  desires,  who 
had  conquered,  who  had  achieved  the  highest  self- 
restraint,  whose  thoughts  and  whose  knowledge 
were  unfettered,  Mahanagas  (great  heroes),  possessed 
of  the  six  kinds  of  knowledge,  self-controlled,  medi- 
tating on  the  eight  kinds  of  salvation,  possessed  of  the 
powers,  wise  in  wisdom,  elders,  great  disciples,  viz. 

I.  A^;7atakau;/rt^inya,  2.  An^a^t,  3.  Vashpa,  4.  Maha- 
naman,  5.  Bhadra^it,  6.  Ya.<rodeva,  y.Vimala,  8.  Subi- 
hu,  9.  Pur;/a  Maitraya;^iputra\  10.  Uruvilva-ka^yapa, 

II.  Nadi-kii-yapa,  12.  Gaya-ki^yapa,  13.  Kumara-k4- 
jyapa,  14.  Maha-ka^yapa,  15.  .Sariputra  ^  16.  IMaha- 
maudgalyayana,  17.  Mahakaush///ilya,  18.  Mahaka- 
phila,  19.  Maha/J'unda,  20.  Aniruddha  ^  21.  Nandika, 
22.  Kampila  *,  23.  Subhuti,  24.  Revata,  25.  Khadira- 
va7^ika  •■'',  26.  Vakula,  27.  Svdgata,  28.  Amoghara^a, 
29.  Paniya;/ika,  30.  Patka,  31.  A'ullapatka,  32.  Nanda, 
2,^.  Rahula,  and  34.  the  blessed  Ananda, — with  these 
and  with  other  elders,  and  great  disciples,  who  were 
wise  in  wisdom,  with  the  exception  of  one  person 
who  had  still  to  be  advanced  on  the  path  of  the 
disciples,  viz.  the  blessed  Ananda ; — and  with  many 
noble-minded  Bodhisattvas,  led  by  Maitreya. 

'  These  two  names  refer  to  one  and  the  same  person. 
^  Nos.  ir;  and  16  are  taken  as  one  in  the  MSS,  A  B. 
'  Frequently  called  Anuruddha, 

*  Kimbila  is  mentioned  with   Anuruddha  and  Nandiya  in  the 
Mahfivagga  X,  4,  2. 
»  Sec  Pdw.VIlI,  4,  5. 


§  2.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  3 

§  2.  Then  the  blessed  Ananda,  having  risen  from 
his  seat,  having  put  his  cloak  on  one  shoulder,  and 
knelt  on  the  earth  with  his  right  knee,  making  obeis- 
ance with  folded  hands  in  the  direction  of  the  Bha- 
gavat,  spoke  thus  to  the  Bhagavat :  '  Thy  organs  of 
sense,  O  Bhagavat,  are  serene,  the  colour  of  thy  skin 
is  clear,  the  colour  of  thy  face  bright  and  yellowish. 
As  an  autumn  cloud  is  pale,  clear,  bright  and  yel- 
lowish, thus  the  organs  of  sense  of  the  Bhagavat 
are  serene,  the  colour  of  his  face  is  clear,  the  colour 
of  his  skin  bright  and  yellowish.  And  as,  O  Bha- 
gavat, a  piece  of  gold  coming  from  the  6^ambil 
river,  having  been  thrown  into  a  furnace  by  a  clever 
smith  or  by  his  apprentice,  and  well  fashioned, 
when  thrown  on  a  pale  cloth,  looks  extremely  clear, 
bright  and  yellowish,  thus  the  organs  of  sense  of  the 
Bhagavat  are  serene,  the  colour  of  his  face  is  clear, 
and  the  colour  of  his  skin  bright  and  yellowish. 
Moreover,  I  do  not  know,  O  Bhagavat,  that  I  have 
ever  seen  the  organs  of  sense  of  the  Tathagata 
so  serene,  the  colour  of  his  face  so  clear,  and  the 
colour  of  his  skin  so  bright  and  yellowish  before 
now.  This  thought  occurs  to  me,  O  Bhagavat : 
probably,  the  Tathagata  ^  dwells  to-day  in  the  state 
of  a  Buddha,  probably  the  Tathagata  dwells  to-day 
in  the  state  of  a  6^ina,  in  the  state  of  omniscience, 
in  the  state  of  a  Mahanaga ;  and  he  contemplates 
the  holy  and  fully  enlightened  Tathagatas  of  the 
past,  future,  and  present.' 

After  these  words,  the  Bhagavat  thus  spoke  to 
the  blessed  Ananda:  'Well  said!  well  said  !  Ananda. 
Did  the  gods  suggest  this  matter  to  you  ?   or  the 


^  That  is,  Buddha  ^'aUyamau'. 
*lj  2 


4  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAtJ,  §  2. 

blessed  Buddhas  ?     Or  do  you  know  this  through 
the  philosophical  knowledge  which  you  possess  ? ' 

After  these  words  the  blessed  Ananda  spoke  thus 
to  the  Bhagavat :  '  The  gods.  O  Bhagavat,  do  not 
suggest  this  matter  to  me,  nor  the  blessed  Buddhas, 
but  this  thought  occurs  to  me  by  my  own  philosophy 
alone,  viz.  that  probably  the  Tathagata  dwells  to-day 
in  the  state  of  a  Buddha,  probably  the  Tathagata 
dwells  to-day  in  the  state  of  a  6"ina,  in  the  state  of 
omniscience,  [in  the  state  of  a  Mahanaga]  ^ ;  or  he 
contemplates  [the  venerable  Buddhas]  of  the  past, 
future,  and  present' 

After  these  words  the  Bhagavat  spoke  thus  to  the 
blessed  Ananda  :  '  Well  said  !  well  said  !  Ananda  ; 
excellent  indeed  is  your  question  2,  good  your  philo- 
sophy, and  beautiful  your  understanding!  You, 
O  Ananda,  have  arrived  for  the  benefit  and  happi- 
ness of  many  people,  out  of  compassion  for  the 
world,  for  the  sake  of  the  great  body  of  men,  for  the 
benefit  and  happiness  of  gods  and  men,  as  you  think 
it  riofht  to  ask  the  Tath^eata  this  matter  ^ :     Thus, 

A 

indeed,  Ananda  might  pile  up*  intellectual  know- 
ledge under  immeasurable  and  innumerable  blessed, 
holy,  and  fully  enlightened  Tathagatas,  and  yet  the 
knowledge  of  the  Tathagata  would  not  be  exceeded 
thereby.  And  why  ?  Because,  O  Ananda,  one  who 
possesses  the  knowledge  of  a  Tathagata  possesses 
an  intellectual  knowledire  of  causes  that  cannot  be 

o 


'  This  is  left  out  here.     Mahanaga,  technical  term  for  greatness. 
^  IJnmiitga,  all  the  Chinese  translators  translate  as  'question.' 
'  One  expects  tathagatam  etam  artham. 
*  I  have  adopted  the  reading  of  B,  in  order  to  have  a  subject  for 
upasawharct,  but  AC  P  read  ananda. 


§  2.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  5 

exceeded  ^  If  2  the  Tathagata  wished,  O  Ananda, 
he  could  live  for  a  whole  kalpa  (age)  on  one  alms-gift, 
or  for  a  hundred  kalpas,  or  for  a  thousand  kalpas, 
or  for  a  hundred  thousand  kalpas,  to  a  hundred 
thousand  niyutas  of  ko/is  of  kalpas  ^  nay,  he  could 
live  beyond,  and  yet  the  organs  of  nature  of  the 
Tathagata  would  not  perish,  the  colour  of  his  face 
would  not  be  altered,  nor  would  the  colour  of  his 
skin  be  injured.  And  why  ?  Because,  O  Ananda, 
the  Tathagata  has  so  fully  obtained  the  Paramitas  * 
which  arise  from  Samadhi  ^,  The  appearance  of 
fully  enlightened  Buddhas  is  very  difficult  to  be 
obtained  in  this  world,  O  Ananda.  As  the  appear- 
ance of  Audumbara-flowers  is  very  difficult  to  be 
obtained  in  this  world;  thus,  O  Ananda,  the  appear- 
ance of  Tathagatas  who  desire  welfare,  wish  for 
what  is  beneficial,  are  compassionate,  and  have 
arrived  at  the  highest  compassion,  is  very  difficult 
to  be  obtained.  But,  O  Ananda,  it  is  (owing  to) 
the  grace  of  the  Tathagata  himself  that  you  think 
that  the  Tathagata  should  be  asked  this  question, 
so  that  there  may  arise  in  this  world  beings  who 
can  be  teachers  of  all  the  world,  for  the  sake  of 
noble-minded  Bodhisattvas.  Therefore,  O  Ananda, 
listen,  and  take  it  well  and  rightly  to  heart !  I  shall 
tell  you.' 


^  I  am  not  satisfied  with  this  translation,  but  I  do  not  think  that 
^«ana,  even  in  Buddhist  Sanskrit,  could  ever  be  used  as  a  mascu- 
line, and  I  therefore  take  tathagata^wana/^  as  a  Bahuvrihi. 

^  Read^wana^.     Akahkshan. 

*  Large  numbers,  constantly  recurring  in  the  text.  Niyuta  is 
explained  as  a  million,  ko/i  as  ten  millions. 

*  The  highest  perfection. 
•*  Deep  meditation. 


6  DESCRIPTION    OF   SUKHAVAT!,  §  3. 

'  Yes,   O   Bhagavat,'  so  did  the  blessed  Ananda 
answer  the  Bhagavat. 

§  3.  The  Bhagavat  then  spoke  to  Ananda  :  *  At 
the  time,  O  Ananda,  which  was  long  ago  in  the  past, 
in  an  innumerable  and  more  than  innumerable,  enor- 
mous, immeasurable,  and  incomprehensible  kalpa 
before  now, — at  that  time,  and  at  that  moment,  there 
arose  in  the  world  a  holy  and  fully  enlightened 
Tathagata  called  i.  Dipaiikara.  Following  after 
Dipaiikara,  O  Ananda,  there  was  a  Tathagata 
2.  Pratapavat,  and  after  him,  3.  Prabhakara,  4.  Aan- 
danagandha,  5.  Sumerukalpa,  6.  A'andana,  7,  Vima- 
lanana,  8.  Anupalipta,  9.  Vimalaprabha,  10.  Naga- 
bhibhu,  II.  Suryodana,  12.  Girira^aghosha,  13. 
Meruku/a,  14.  Suvar;/aprabha,  15.  6^yotishprabha, 
16.  Vai^^/uryanirbhasa,  17.  Brahmaghosha,  iS-A^anda- 
bhibhu,  19.  Turyaghosha,  20.  IMuktakusumapratima;^- 
^itaprabha,  21.  K^riku/a,  22.  Sagaravarabuddhivikrl- 
rt'itabhi^yla,  23.  Varaprabha,  24.  Mahagandhara^nir- 
bhasa,  25.  Yyapagatakhilamalapratighosha,  26.  ^'ura- 
ku/a,  27.  Ra^/a^^;'aha,  28.  Mahagu^^adharabuddhi- 
praptabhi^;7a,  29.  /vTandrasurya^ihrnikara/za,  30.  Ut- 
taptavai^/uryanirbhisa,  31.  A'ittadharabuddhisanku- 
sumitabhyudgata,  32.  Pushpavativanara^asahkusu- 
mitabhi^;7a,  33.  Pushpakara,  34.  Udaka/'andra,  35. 
Avid)'andhakaravidhvawsanakara,  36.  Lokendra,  37. 
Mukta/Z'/zatrapravatasadr/Va,  T)^.  Tishya,  39.  Dhar- 
mamativinanditard^^a,  40.  Siwhasagarakii/avinandi- 
tara^,  41.  Sagarameru/'andra,  42.  Brahmasvara- 
nadabhinandita,  43.  Kusumasambhava,  44.  Prapta- 
scna,  45.  A'andrabhrinu,  46.  MerukiVa,  47.  Aandra- 
prabha,  48.  Vimalanetra,  49.  Girird^^'aghoshc^vara, 
50.  Kusumaprabha,  51.  Kusumavrzsh/yabhiprakir//a, 
52.    Ratna/andra,    53.    Padmabimbyupajobhita,    54. 


§  4.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS. 


Aandanagandha,  55.  Ratnabhibhasa,  56.  Nimi,  57. 
Mahavyuha,  58.  Vyapagatakhilaclosha,  59.  Brahma- 
ghosha,  60.  Saptaratnabhivr/sh/a,  61.  Maha^u;^a- 
dhara,  62.  Mahatamalapatra/('andanakardama,  63. 
Kusumabhi^/m,  64.  A^;7anavldhva7;2sana,  65.  Ke- 
^arln,  66.  Mukta/{'/{7/atra,  6^].  Suvanmgarbha,  68. 
Vai^Liryagarbha,  69.  Mahaketu,  70.  Dharmaketu,  71. 
Ratnaketu,  72.  Ratna^ri,  ']i.  Lokendra,  74.  Naren- 
dra,  75.  Karumka,  76.  Lokasundara,  77.  Brahmaketu, 
>]%.  Dharmamati,  79.  Si;/2ha,  80.  Si;;2hamati.  After 
Siwhamati,  a  holy  and  fully  enlightened  Tathagata 
arose  in  the  world,  Loke^vararafa  by  name,  perfect 
in  knowledge  and  conduct,  a  Sugata,  knowing  the 
world,  without  a  superior,  charioteer  of  men  whose 
passions  have  to  be  tamed,  teacher  of  gods  and  men, 
a  Buddha,  a  Bhagavat.  And  again  during  the  time 
of  the  preaching  of  this  holy  and  fully  enlightened 
Tathagata  Loke^varara^a,  O  Ananda,  there  was 
a  Bhikshu,  Dharmakara  by  name,  richly  endowed 
with  memory,  with  understanding,  prudence,  and 
wisdom, — richly  endowed  with  vigour,  and  of  noble 
character. 

f  4.  '  Then,  O  Ananda,  that  Bhikshu  Dharmakara, 
having  risen  from  his  seat,  having  put  his  cloak 
on  one  shoulder,  and  knelt  on  the  earth  with  his 
right  knee,  stretching  forth  his  folded  hands  to 
where  the  Bhagavat  Tathagata  Loke^varara^a  was, 
and,  after  worshipping  the  Bhagavat,  he,  at  that 
very  time,  praised  him  in  his  presence  with  these 
G^thas  1 : 

"  O  thou  of  immeasurable  light,  whose  knowledge 

^  As  the  text  of  these  Gathas  is  far  from  satisfactory,  I  have  given 
a  translation  of  the  Chinese  translation  by  Sahghavarman  at  the 
end  of  my  edition,  Anecdota  Oxoniensia,  I,  part  ii,  p.  79. 


8  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVATi,  §  4. 

is  endless  and  incomparable ;  not  any  other  light 
can  shine  here  (where  thou  art) !  The  rays  of  the 
moon  of  vSlva  and  of  the  jewel  of  the  sun,  were  not 
bright  here  in  the  whole  world,     (i) 

"  The  form  also  is  infinite  in  the  best  of  beings  ^ ; 
thus  also  the  voice  of  Buddha  is  of  infinite  sound ; 
his  virtue  likewise,  with  meditation,  knowledge  2, 
strength ;  like  unto  thee  there  is  no  one  in  this 
world.     (2) 

"  The  Law  (dharma)  is  deep,  wide,  and  subtle ;  the 
best  of  Buddhas  is  incomprehensible,  like  the  ocean ; 
therefore  there  is  no  further  exaltation  of  the 
teacher ;  having  left  all  faults,  he  is  gone  to  the 
other  shore  ^     (3) 

"  Then  the  best  of  Buddhas  *,  of  endless  light,  lights 
up  all  regions,  he  the  king  of  kings ;  and  I,  having 
become  Buddha,  and  a  master  of  the  Law,  may  I 
deliver  mankind  from  old  age  and  death  !     (4) 

"And  I,  on  the  strength  of  generosity,  equanimity, 
virtue,  forbearance,  power,  meditation  and  absorp- 
tion, undertake  here  the  first  and  best  duties, 
and  shall  become  a  Buddha,  the  saviour  of  all 
beings.     (5) 

"And  I,  seeking  for  the  knowledge  of  the  best 
of  the  Blessed  Ones,  shall  always  worship  many 
hundred  thousands  of  ko/is  of  Buddhas,  endless  like 
the  sand  of  the  Gahga,  the  incomparable  lords.    (6) 

'  It  would  be  better  to  read  sattvasSra  as  a  vocative.  See 
p.  22,  1.  5. 

'  1  have  translated  as  if  the  reading  were  pra^^'wa,  which  would, 
however,  have  spoiled  the  metre. 

'  The  text  has  »dhikdlam,  and  ^bdhiparam  is  suggested  as 
a  conjecture  only. 

*  I  translate  buddhavara. 


§  5.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  9 

"  Whatever  worlds  there  are,  similar  (in  number) 
to  the  sand  of  the  Ganga,  and  the  endless  coun- 
tries which  exist  besides,  there  everywhere  I  shall 
send  out  light,  because  I  have  attained  such 
power  \     (7) 

"  My  land  is  (to  be)  noble,  the  first  and  the  best ; 
the  Bodhi-tree  excellent  in  this  world  -.  There  is 
incomparable  happiness  arising  from  Nirva;^a,  and 
this  also  I  shall  explain  as  vain.     (8) 

"  Beings^  come  hither  from  the  ten  quarters ; 
having  arrived  there  they  quickly  show  my  happiness. 
May  Buddha  there  teach  me  the  truth, — I  form  a 
desire  full  of  true  strength  and  vigour.     (9) 

"  I,  knowing  the  worlds  of  the  ten  quarters,  pos- 
sessed of  absolute  knowledge — they  also  always 
proclaim  my  thought!  May  I,  gone  to  Avi/^'i  hell, 
always  abide  there,  but  I  shall  never  cease  to  prac- 
tise the  power  of  prayer !  [i.  e.  May  I  remain  in 
hell,  if  I  cease  to  pray.]"     (10) 

§  5.  '  Then,  O  Ananda,  that  Bhikshu  Dharmakara, 
having  praised  the  Bhagavat,  the  Tathagata  Loke- 
^vararafa,  in  his  presence,  with  those  Gathas,  spoke 
thus :  "  O  Bhagavat,  I  wish  to  know  the  highest 
perfect  knowledge.  Again  and  again  I  raise  and 
incline  my  thoughts  towards  the  highest  perfect 
knowledge.  May  therefore  the  Bhagavat,  as 
a  teacher,  thus  teach  me  the  Law,  that  I  may 
quickly  know  the  highest  perfect  knowledge.  May 
I  become  in  the  world  a  Tathagata,  equal  to  the 


1  The  text  is  obscure,  Sahghavarman  translates :  '  My  light  will 
shine  over  all  these  countries,  thus  my  strength  and  power  will  be 
immeasurable.' 

^  According  to  the  Chinese  translation. 

'  Should  it  be  sattva? 


lO  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAXi,  §6. 

unequalled.  And  may  the  Bhagavat  proclaim  those 
signs  by  which  I  may  comprehend  the  perfection 
of  all  good  qualities  of  a  Buddha  country." 

'  After  this,  O  Ananda,  the  Bhagavat  Lokejvara- 
rd^a,  the  Tathagata,  thus  spoke  to  that  Bhikshu  : 

"  Do  you  by  yourself,  O  Bhikshu,  know  the  perfec- 
tion of  all  excellences  and  good  qualities  of  a  Buddha 
country  ?  " 

'  He  said  :  "  O  Bhagavat,  I  could  not  do  this,  but 
the  Bhagavat  alone.  Explain  the  perfection  of  the 
excellences  and  all  the  good  qualities  of  Buddha 
countries  of  the  other  Tathagatas,  after  hearing 
which  we  may  fulfil  every  one  of  their  signs." 

'  Then,  O  Ananda,  the  Tathagata  Lokei^varara^a, 
holy  and  fully  enlightened,  knowing  the  good  dis- 
position of  that  Bhikshu,  taught  for  a  full  ko/i  of 
years  the  perfection  of  all  the  excellences  and 
good  qualities  of  Buddha  countries  belonging  to 
eighty-one  hundred  thousand  niyutas  of  ko/is  of 
Buddhas,  together  with  the  signs,  indication,  and 
description,  desiring  welfare,  wishing  for  benefits, 
compassionate,  full  of  compassion,  so  that  there 
might  never  be  an  end  of  Buddha  countries,  having 
conceived  great  pity  for  all  beings.  The  measure 
of  life  of  that  Tathagata  was  full  forty  kalpas. 

§  6.  '  Then,  O  Ananda,  that  Bhikshu  Dharmakara, 
taking  the  perfections  of  all  the  excellences  and 
good  qualities  of  those  Buddha  countries,  of  those 
eighty-one  hundred  thousand  niyutas  of  ko/is  of 
Buddhas,  and  concentrating  them  all  on  one  Buddha 
country,  worshipped  with  his  head  the  feet  of  the 
Bhagavat  Lokc.Tvarara^'-a,  the  Tathagata,  turned 
respectfully  round  him  to  the  right,  and  walked 
away   from   the   presence    of   this   Bhagavat.     And 


§  7.  TFIE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  I  I 

afterwards,  for  the  space  of  five  kalpas,  he  thus 
concentrated  the  perfection  of  all  the  excellences 
and  good  qualities  of  the  Buddha  countries,  such  as 
had  never  been  known  before  in  the  ten  quarters  of 
the  whole  world,  more  excellent,  and  more  perfect 
than  any,  and  composed  the  most  excellent  prayer. 

§  7.  '  Thus,  O  Ananda,  that  Bhikshu  concentrated 
in  his  mind  a  perfection  of  a  Buddha  country 
eighty-one  times  more  immeasurable,  noble,  and 
excellent  than  the  perfection  of  the  eighty-one  hun- 
dred thousand  niyutas  of  ko/is  of  Buddha  countries 
that  had  been  told  him  by  the  Bhagavat  Loke- 
^varara^a,  the  Tathagata.  And  then,  proceeding 
to  where  the  Tathagata  was,  he  worshipped  the 
feet  of  the  Bhagavat  with  his  head,  and  said : 
"  O  Bhagavat,  the  perfection  of  all  the  excellences 
and  good  qualities  of  the  Buddha  countries  has 
been  concentrated  by  me." 

'After  this,  O  Ananda,  the  Tathagata  Loke- 
5varara^a  thus  spoke  to  the  Bhikshu  :  "  Preach  then, 
O  Bhikshu  ; — the  Tathagata  allows  it.  Now  is  the 
proper  time,  O  Bhikshu.  Delight  the  assembly, 
produce  joy,  let  the  lion's  voice  be  heard,  so 
that  now  and  hereafter,  noble-minded  Bodhisattvas, 
hearing  it,  may  comprehend  the  different  subjects 
(or  occasions)  of  the  prayers  for  the  perfection  of 
the  good  qualities  of  a  Buddha  country." 

'Then,  O  Ananda,  that  Bhikshu  Dharmakara 
thus  spoke  at  that  time  to  the  Bhagavat :  "  May 
the  Bhagavat  thus  listen  to  me,  to  what  my  own 
prayers  are,  and  how,  after  I  shall  have  obtained 
the  highest  perfect  knowledge,  my  own  Buddha 
country  will  then  be  endowed  with  all  inconceivable 
excellences  and  good  qualities. 


12  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAXi,  §8. 

§  S.  I.  "O  Bhagavat,  if  in  that  Buddha  country 
of  mine  there  should  be  either  hell,  brute-creation  \ 
the  realm  of  departed  spirits,  or  the  body  of 
Asuras,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect 
knowledore. 

2.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  in  that  Buddha  country  of 
mine  the  beings  who  are  born  there  should  fall  away 
(die),  and  fall  into  hell,  the  brute-creation,  the  realm 
of  departed  spirits,  or  into  the  body  of  Asuras,  then 
may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

3.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  in  that  Buddha  country  of 
mine  the  beings  who  are  born  there  should  not  all 
be  of  one  colour,  viz.  a  golden  colour,  then  may 
I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

4.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  in  that  Buddha  country  of 
mine  there  should  be  perceived  any  difference 
between  gods  and  men,  except  when  people  count 
and  tell,  saying  :  '  These  are  gods  and  men,  but 
only  in  ordinary  and  imperfect  parlance,'  then  may 
I   not  obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

5.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  in  that  Buddha  country  of 
mine  the  beings  who  are  born  there  should  not  be 
possessed  of  the  highest  Paramitas  of  miraculous 
power  and  self-control,  so  that  they  could  at  least 
in  the  shortest  moment  of  one  thought  step  over 
a  hundred  thousand  niyutas  of  ko/is  of  Buddha 
countries,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect 
knowledge. 

6.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  in  that  Buddha  country  of 
mine  the  beings  who  arc  born  there  should  not  all  be 
possessed  of  the  recollection  of  their  former  births, 
so  as  at   least   to   remember  a   hundred    thousand 

'  Birlli  as  an  animal. 


§8.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  1 3 

niyutas  of  ko/is  of  kalpas,  then  may  I   not  obtain 
the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

7.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  in  that  Buddha  country  of 
mine  the  beings  who  are  born  there  should  not  all 
acquire  the  divine  eye,  so  as  at  least  to  be  able 
to  see  a  hundred  thousand  niyutas  of  ko/is  of 
worlds,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect 
knowledge. 

8.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  in  that  Buddha  country  of  mine 
the  beings  who  are  born  there  should  not  all  acquire 
the  divine  ear,  so  as  at  least  to  be  able  to  hear 
at  the  same  time  the  good  Law  from  a  hundred 
thousand  niyutas  of  ko/is  of  Buddha  countries,  then 
may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

9.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  in  that  Buddha  country  of  mine 
the  beings  who  are  born  there  should  not  all  be 
skilled  in  the  knowledge  of  the  thoughts  of  other 
people,  so  as  at  least  to  be  able  to  know  the  deeds 
and  thoughts  of  beings  belonging  to  a  hundred 
thousand  niyutas  of  ko/is  of  Buddha  countries, 
then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect  know- 
ledge. 

10.  "O  Bhagavat,  if  in  that  Buddha  country  of 
mine  the  beings  who  are  born  there  should  form 
any  idea  of  property,  even  with  regard  to  their 
own  body,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  per- 
fect knowledge. 

11.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  in  that  Buddha  country  of 
mine  the  beinofs  who  are  born  there  should  not  all 
be  firmly  established,  viz.  in  absolute  truth,  till  they 
have  reached  Mahaparinirva;^a,  then  may  I  not 
obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

12.  "O  Bhagavat,  if  any  being  should  be  able 
to  count  the  pupils  belonging  to  me  after  I  have 


14  DESCRIPTION  OF    SUKHAVAtJ,  §8. 

obtained  the  highest  perfect  knowledge  in  that 
Buddha  country  of  mine,  even  if  all  beings  who  are 
contained  in  those  three  millions  of  spheres  of 
worlds  \  after  having  become  Pratyckabuddhas  ^ 
should  be  counting  for  a  hundred  thousand  niyutas  of 
ko/is  of  kalpas,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest 
perfect  knowledge. 

13.  "O  Bhagavat,  if,  after  I  have  obtained  the 
highest  perfect  knowledge,  my  light  should  be  liable 
to  be  measured  in  this  Buddha  country  of  mine, 
even  by  the  measure  of  a  hundred  thousand  niyutas 
of  ko/is  of  Buddha  countries,  then  may  I  not  obtain 
the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

14.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  the  measure  of  the  life  of  the 
beings  in  that  Buddha  country  of  mine,  after  I  have 
obtained  the  highest  perfect  knowledge,  should  be 
liable  to  be  measured,  excepting  always  by  their 
own  power  of  prayer,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the 
highest  perfect  knowledge. 

15.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  the  measure  of  my  life  after 
I  have  obtained  Bodhi  (Buddha  knowledge)  should 
be  limited,  even  by  numbering  a  hundred  thousand 
niyutas  of  ko/is  of  kalpas,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the 
highest  perfect  knowledge, 

16.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if,  for  the  beings  in  this  Buddha 
country  of  mine,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi,  even 
the  name  of  sin  should  exist,  then  may  I  not  obtain 
the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

17.  "O  P>hagavat,  if  immeasurable  and  innumer- 
able   blessed    Buddhas    in    immeasurable    Buddha 


'  Trisfihasra  mahliRahasra. 
Men    ready  for  Ikiddhaslup,   but  wlio  decline  to    preach  or 
communicate  their  knowledge. 


§8.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  1 5 

countries  do  not  glorify  my  name,  after  I  have 
obtained  the  Bodhi  (knowledge);  if  they  do  not 
preach  my  fame  and  proclaim  my  praise,  and  utter 
it  together,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest 
perfect  knowledge. 

i8^  "O  Bhagavat,  if  those  beings  who  have 
directed  their  thought  towards  the  highest  perfect 
knowledge  in  other  worlds,  and  who,  after  having 
heard  my  name,  when  I  have  obtained  the  Bodhi 
(knowledge),  have  meditated  on  me  with  serene 
thoughts ;  if  at  the  moment  of  their  death,  after 
having  approached  them,  surrounded  by  an  assembly 
of  Bhikshus,  I  should  not  stand  before  them,  wor- 
shipped by  them,  that  is,  so  that  their  thoughts 
should  not  be  troubled,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the 
highest  perfect  knowledge. 

19.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  those  beings  who  in  im- 
measurable and  innumerable  Buddha  countries, 
after  they  have  heard  my  name,  when  I  shall  have 
obtained  Bodhi,  should  direct  their  thouo^ht  to  be 
born  in  that  Buddha  country  of  mine,  and  should  for 
that  purpose  bring  their  stock  of  merit  to  maturity, 
if  these  should  not  be  born  in  that  Buddha  country, 
even  those  who  have  only  ten  times  repeated  the 
thought  (of  that  Buddha  country),  barring  always 
those  beings  who  have  committed  the  (five)  Anan- 
tarya  sins  -,  and  who  have  caused  an  obstruction  and 
abuse  of  the  good  Law,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the 
highest  perfect  knowledge. 

20.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  those  beings  who  have  been 

^  On  Pramdhanas  18  to  21,  see  note  at  the  end. 
"^  The  five  sins  which  bring  immediate  retribution.     Cf.  Childers, 
s.  V. 


l6  DESCKIPTION    OF    SUKHAVATi,  §  8. 

born  in  that  Buddha  country  of  mine,  after  I  have 
obtained  Bodhi,  should  not  all  be  bound  to  one 
birth  only,  before  reaching  the  highest  perfect  know- 
ledge, barring  always  the  special  prayers  of  those 
very  noble-minded  Bodhisattvas  who  have  put  on 
the  whole  armour  (of  the  Law),  who  understand  the 
welfare  of  all  beings,  who  are  devoted  to  all  beings, 
who  work  for  the  attainment  of  Nirva^^a  of  all 
beings,  who  wish  to  perform  the  duty  of  a  Bodhi- 
sattva  in  all  worlds,  who  wish  to  serve  all  Buddhas, 
and  to  bring  beings,  in  number  like  grains  of  sand 
of  the  river  Gahga,  to  the  highest  perfect  know- 
ledge, and  who  besides  are  turned  towards  the 
higher  practice  \  and  perfect  in  the  practice  of  the 
Samantabhadra  -  discipline,  then  may  I  not  obtain 
the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

2  1.  "O  Bhagavat,  if  the  Bodhisattvas  who  are 
born  in  that  Buddha  country  of  mine,  after  I  have 
obtained  Bodhi,  should  not  all  be  able,  after  having 
gone  to  other  Buddha  countries,  after  their  one 
morning-meal,  to  worship  many  hundreds  of  Bud- 
dhas, many  thousands  of  Buddhas,  many  hundred 
thousands  of  Buddhas,  many  ko/is  of  Buddhas,  <S:c., 
till  up  to  many  hundred  thousand  niyulas  of  ko/is 
of  Buddhas,  with  objects  which  give  every  kind 
of  pleasure,  and  this  through  the  grace  of  the 
Buddha,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect 
knowledge. 

2  2.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  those  Bodhisattvas  in  that 
Buddha  country  of  mine,  after  I  have  obtained 
Bodhi,  should  wish  their  stock  of  merit  to   grow 


'  Possibly  the  same  as  the  utlarimagga,  Arhatship. 
'  Sec  note  at  the  end. 


§  8.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  1 7 

in  the  following  shapes,  viz.  either  in  gold,  in 
silver,  in  jewels,  in  pearls,  in  beryls,  in  shells,  in 
stones,  in  corals,  in  crystal,  in  amber,  in  red  pearls, 
in  diamond,  &c.,  or  in  any  one  of  the  other  jewels  ; 
or  in  all  kinds  of  perfumes,  in  flowers,  in  garlands, 
in  ointment,  in  incense-powder,  in  cloaks,  in  um- 
brellas, in  flags,  in  banners,  or  in  lamps ;  or  in  all 
kinds  of  dancing,  singing,  and  music ; — and  if  such 
gifts  should  not  appear  for  them,  from  being  pro- 
duced as  soon  as  thought  of,  then  may  I  not  obtain 
the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

23.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  those  beings  who  are  born  in 
that  Buddha  country  of  mine,  after  I  have  obtained 
Bodhi,  should  not  all  recite  the  story  of  the  Law 
which  is  accompanied  by  omniscience,  then  may  I 
not  obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

24.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  the  Bodhisattvas  in  that 
Buddha  country  of  mine,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi, 
should  think  thus:  May  we,  remaining  in  this  world, 
honour,  revere,  esteem,  and  worship  the  blessed 
Buddhas  in  immeasurable  and  innumerable  Buddha 
countries,  viz.  with  cloaks,  alms-bowls,  beds,  stools, 
refreshments,  medicines,  utensils,  with  flowers,  in- 
cense, lamps,  perfumes,  garlands,  ointment,  powder, 
cloaks,  umbrellas,  flags,  banners,  with  different  kinds 
of  dancing,  singing,  and  music,  and  with  showers  of 
jewels, — and  if  the  blessed  Buddhas  should  not  accept 
them,  when  they  are  produced  as  soon  as  thought 
of,  viz.  from  compassion,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the 
highest  perfect  knowledge. 

25.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  the  Bodhisattvas  who  are  born 
in  that  Buddha  country  of  mine,  after  I  have  obtained 
Bodhi,  should  not  all  be  in  possession  of  strength  of 
body  as  strong  as  the  diamond  (or  thunderbolt  ?)  of 

[49]  ''c 


1 8  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAtJ,  §8. 

Ndraya;/a,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect 
knowledge. 

26.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  any  being  in  that  Buddha 
country  of  mine,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi,  should 
learn  the  limit  of  the  beauty  of  (its)  ornament,  even 
if  he  be  possessed  of  the  divine  eye,  and  should 
know  (its)  various  beauty,  saying :  *  That  Buddha 
country  possesses  so  much  beauty  and  so  much 
magnificence,'  then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest 
perfect  knowledge. 

27.  "O  Bhagavat,  if  in  that  Buddha  country  of 
mine,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi,  a  Bodhisattva 
possessed  even  of  a  very  small  stock  of  merit, 
should  not  perceive  the  Bodhi-tree  of  noble  beauty, 
at  least  a  hundred  yo^anas  in  height,  then  may 
I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

28.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  in  that  Buddha  country  of 
mine,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi,  either  teaching 
or  learning  should  have  to  be  made  by  any  being, 
and  they  should  not  all  be  in  possession  of  the  per- 
fect knowledge,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest 
perfect  knowledge. 

29.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  that  Buddha  country  of  mine, 
after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi,  should  not  be  so  bril- 
liant, that  in  it  could  be  seen  on  all  sides  immeasur- 
able, innumerable,  inconceivable,  incomparable,  im- 
mense Buddha  countries,  as  a  round  face  is  seen  in 
a  highly  burnished  round  mirror,  then  may  I  not 
obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

30.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  in  that  Buddha  country  of 
mine,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi,  there  should  not 
be  a  hundred  thousand  of  vases  full  of  difterent 
sweet  perfumes,  made  of  all  kinds  of  jewels,  always 
smoking  with  incense,  fit  for  the  worship  of  Bodhi- 


§8.  THE   LAND    OF    BLISS.  19 


sattvas  and  Tathagatas,  rising  into  the  sky  beyond 
gods,  men,  and  all  things,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the 
highest  perfect  knowledge. 

31.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  in  that  Buddha  country  of 
mine,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi,  there  should  not 
be  showers  of  sweet  jewel-flowers,  always  pouring 
down,  and  if  there  should  not  be  sweet-sounding 
music-clouds,  always  playing,  then  may  I  not  obtain 
the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

32.  "O  Bhagavat,  if  the  beings  belonging  to  me, 
after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi,  who  are  visible  by  their 
splendour,  in  immeasurable,  innumerable,  inconceiv- 
able, incomparable  worlds,  should  not  all  be  filled 
with  pleasure,  far  beyond  gods  and  men,  then  may 
I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

33.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi, 
the  noble-minded  Bodhisattvas  in  immeasurable, 
inconceivable,  incomparable,  immense  Buddha  coun- 
tries on  all  sides,  after  having  heard  my  name, 
should  not  be  delivered  from  birth,  through  the 
merit  arising  from  that  hearing,  and  should  not 
be  strong  in  the  knowledge  of  Dhara7ns,  until  they 
have  obtained  the  very  throne  of  Bodhi,  then  may 
I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

34.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi, 
women  in  immeasurable,  innumerable,  inconceivable, 
incomparable,  immense  Buddha  countries  on  all 
sides,  after  having  heard  my  name,  should  allow 
carelessness  to  arise,  should  not  turn  their  thoughts 
towards  Bodhi,  should,  when  they  are  free  from 
birth,  not  despise  their  female  nature ;  and  if  they, 
being  born  again,  should  assume  a  second  female 
nature,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect 
knowledge. 

'"'  c  2 


20  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAtJ,  §8. 

35.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi, 
the  Bodhisattvas  who  in  immeasurable,  innumer- 
able, inconceivable,  incomparable,  immense  Buddha 
countries  round  about  in  the  ten  quarters  having 
heard  my  name,  and  having  fallen  down,  shall 
worship  me  with  prostrate  reverence,  should  not, 
when  performing  the  duty  of  Bodhisattvas,  be 
honoured  by  the  world  and  by  the  gods,  then  may 
I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

36.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi, 
the  work  of  dyeing,  sewing,  drying,  washing  of  his 
cloaks  should  have  to  be  performed  by  any  Bodhi- 
sattva,  and  they  should  not  perceive  themselves, 
as  quick  as  thought,  covered  by  newly-produced 
excellent  cloaks,  granted  to  them  by  the  Tatha- 
gata,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect 
knowledge. 

2,^.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  the  beings  who  are  born  at 
the  same  time  in  that  Buddha  country,  after  I  have 
obtained  Bodhi,  should  not  obtain  such  happiness  as 
that  of  the  holy  Bhikshu  who  is  free  from  pain  and 
has  obtained  the  third  meditation,  then  may  I  not 
obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

38.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  those  Bodhisattvas  who  are 
born  in  that  Buddha  country  of  mine,  after  I  have 
obtained  Bodhi,  should  not  produce  from  different 
jewel-trees  such  a  mass  of  excellent  ornaments  in 
that  lUiddha  country,  as  they  should  wish  for,  then 
may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

39.  "O  Bhagavat,  if  the  Bodhisattvas  who  are  born 
in  other  Buddha  countries,  when  they  have  heard 
my  name,  after  I  shall  have  obtained  Bodhi,  should 
suffer  any  diminution  in  the  strength  of  their  senses, 
then  iiia\  1  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 


§  8.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  2  I 

40.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi, 
the  Bodhisattvas,  from  hearing  my  name  in  a  place 
of  a  different  Buddha  country,  should  not  obtain  the 
Samadhi  (ecstacy)  called  Suvibhaktavati,  in  which 
Samadhi  the  Bodhisattvas  will  see  immeasurable, 
innumerable,  inconceivable,  incomparable,  immense, 
blessed  Buddhas  one  moment  after  another ;  and  if 
that  Samadhi  of  theirs  should  come  to  an  end  mean- 
while, then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect 
knowledge. 

41.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi, 
beings,  having  heard  my  name  in  Buddha  countries 
different  from  this,  should  not,  through  the  stock  of 
merit  which  follows  on  that  hearing,  obtain  birth  in 
a  noble  family,  till  they  arrive  at  Bodhi,  then  may 
I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

42.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi, 
the  Bodhisattvas  who  live  in  other  Buddha  countries, 
after  hearing  my  name,  till  they  have  reached  Bodhi 
by  the  stock  of  merit  which  follows  on  that  hearing, 
should  not  all  obtain  a  combination  of  their  stock 
of  merit  with  the  joy  and  gladness  of  their  Bodhi- 
sattva  life,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  per- 
fect knowledge. 

43.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi, 
the  Bodhisattvas,  as  soon  as  they  have  heard  my 
name,  in  other  worlds,  should  not  obtain  the 
Samadhi  called  Samantdnugata,  in  which  Bodhi- 
sattvas honour  one  moment  after  another  im- 
measurable, innumerable,  inconceivable,  incompar- 
able, immense,  blessed  Buddhas,  and  if  that 
Samadhi  of  theirs  should  come  to  an  end  before 
they  have  reached  the  throne  of  Bodhi,  then  may 
I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 


22  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAXf,  §  9. 

44.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if  the  beings  who  are  born  in 
that  Buddha  country  of  mine,  after  I  have  obtained 
Bodhi,  should  not  hear,  as  quick  as  thought,  such 
a  teaching  of  the  Law  as  they  wish  to  hear,  then  may 
I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

45.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi, 
the  Bodhisattvas  in  this  and  other  Buddha  coun- 
tries, as  soon  as  they  have  heard  my  name,  should 
ever  turn  back  from  the  highest  perfect  know- 
ledge, then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect 
knowledge. 

46.  "  O  Bhagavat,  if,  after  I  have  obtained  Bodhi, 
and  liave  become  a  Buddha-teacher,  the  Bodhi- 
sattvas who  hear  my  name  in  Buddha  countries,  and 
obtain  the  first,  the  second,  and  the  third  degrees  of 
endurance,  as  soon  as  they  have  heard  my  name, 
should  turn  away  again  from  Buddha,  the  Law,  and 
the  Church,  then  may  I  not  obtain  the  highest  perfect 
knowledge." 

§  9.  '  And  again,  O  Ananda,  when  he  had  spoken 
such  prayers,  that  Bhikshu  Dharmakara,  at  that 
time,  through  the  grace  of  Buddha  spoke  these 
verses  '  : 

1.  "If,  when  I  have  obtained  Bodhi,  there  should 
not  be  for  me  an  excellent  Prawidhana  of  such 
a  character,  then,  O  Prince,  O  Best  of  beings,  may 
I  not  be  endowed  with  the  ten  powers,  incomparable, 
worthy  of  offerings  -. 

2.  "If  there  should  not  be  for  me  such  a  country,, 
endowed  with  many  and  various  mighty  and  divine 


'  The  translation  of  these  verses,  owing  to  the  imperfect  state  of 
the  text,  is  in  many  places  tentative  only. 
•  See  verse  10. 


§9'  THE   LAND    OF    BLISS.  23 

endowments,   I   should  gladly  go  to  hell,  suffering 
pain,  and  not  be  a  King  of  treasures  \ 

3.  "If,  when  I  have  approached  the  Bodhi  throne, 
my  name  should  not  quickly  reach  the  ten  quarters, 
the  broad  and  many  endless  Buddha  countries,  may 
I  not  be  a  lord  of  the  world,  endowed  with  power. 

4.  "  If  indeed  I  should  delight  in  the  enjoyments  of 
love,  being  deprived  of  zeal,  understanding  and  pru- 
dence, even  after  having  reached  the  incomparable 
and  blessed  Bodhi,  may  I  not  be  a  teacher  in  the 
world,  endowed  with  power. 

5.  "  The  lord  of  vast  light,  incomparable  and  in- 
finite, ha?  illuminated  all  Buddha  countries  in  all 
the  quarters,  he  has  quieted  passions,  all  sins  and 
errors,  he  has  quieted  the  fire  in  the  walk  of  hell. 

6.  "  After  making  his  broad  eye  lustrous,  after 
driving  away  the  darkness  from  all  men,  after  re- 
moving all  untimely  misfortunes,  he  led  hither  those 
who  dwell  in  Svarga  (heaven)  and  who  shine  with 
endless  light. 

7.  "  The  splendour  of  sun  and  moon  does  not 
shine  in  heaven,  nor  the  fiery  splendour  of  the  maze 
of  jewels  of  the  gods ;  the  Lord  overcomes  all 
splendour,  he,  the  bright  one,  who  has  performed 
his  former  discipline. 

8.  "  He  is  the  best  of  men,  the  treasure  of  all  who 
suffer ;  there  is  no  one  like  him  in  all  the  quarters. 
Having  completed  a  hundred  thousand  of  good 
works,  he,  in  his  assembly,  raised  the  lion-voice  of 
Buddha. 

9.  "  After  having  worshipped  former  self-existing 
Chinas,  after  having  performed  immeasurable  ko/is 

'  A  Naga  king  ? 


2  4  DESCRIPTION    OF   SUKHAVAt!,  §  lo. 

of  VOWS  and  penances,  he  became  in  this,  his  best  of 
spiritual  existences,  the  best  of  beings,  possessed  of 
the  full  power  of  prayers. 

10.  "  As  the  Bhagavat,  the  Lord,  who  is  pos- 
sessed of  unlimited  light  of  knowledge,  knows  the 
three  kinds  of  knowledge  in  the  world,  may  I  also 
be  worthy  of  equal  offerings  \  the  best  of  sages,  the 
leader  of  men. 

11.  "If,  O  Lord,  this  my  prayer  succeeds,  after 
I  have  obtained  Bodhi,  may  this  sphere  of  a  thousand 
worlds  tremble,  and  may  a  shower  of  flowers  descend 
on  the  hosts  of  gods." 

12.  'Then  the  earth  trembled,  flowers  were 
showered  down,  hundreds  of  instruments  resounded 
in  the  sk)',  powder  of  heavenly  sweet  sandal-wood 
was  scattered,  and  there  was  a  voice  saying  :  "  Thou 
wilt  be  a  Buddha  in  the  world." 

{  lo.  '  That  Bhikshu  Dharmakara,  the  noble- 
minded  Bodhisattva,  O  Ananda,  was  possessed  of 
this  perfection  of  prayers.  And  a  few  Bodhi- 
sattvas  only,  O  Ananda,  are  possessed  of  such  a 
perfection  of  prayers.  There  is  on  this  earth  an 
appearance  of  a  few  only  of  such  prayers.  Of  a 
few,  however,  existence  cannot  be  denied. 

'  Then  again,  O  Ananda,  this  Bhikshu  Dharma- 
kara having  recited  these  peculiar  prayers  before 
the  Bhagavat  Lokc.fvarara^a,  the  Tathdgata,  and 
before  the  world  including  gods,  MAra,  and  Brah- 
man, and  before  people  consisting  of  6'ramawas  and 
Brahma;/as  with  gods,  men,  and  Asuras,  was  estab- 
lished in  the  attainment  of  the  true  promise.  And 
proclaiming  this  purity  of  the  Buddha  country,  this 

'  Sec  verse  i. 


§  10.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  25 

greatness  and  excellency  of  the  Buddha  country, 
and  performing  the  duty  of  a  Bodhisattva,  he  never 
conceived  the  remotest  thoughts  of  lust,  malevolence, 
and  cruelty,  during  a  hundred  thousand  niyutas  of 
ko/is  of  years,  immeasurable,  innumerable,  incon- 
ceivable, incomparable,  measureless,  immense,  inex- 
pressible ;  and  he  never  conceived  the  idea  of  lust, 
malevolence,  and  cruelty,  nay,  he  never  conceived 
the  idea  of  form,  sound,  smell,  taste,  and  touch. 
He  was  gentle,  charming  indeed,  and  compassionate ; 
pleasant  to  live  with,  agreeable,  amiable,  content,  of 
few  wishes,  satisfied,  retired,  not  evil,  not  foolish, 
not  suspicious,  not  crooked,  not  wicked,  not  deceit- 
ful, tender  \  kindly  speaking,  always  zealous,  docile 
in  the  searching  after  the  pure  Law.  And  for  the 
good  of  all  beings,  he  recited  the  great  prayer, 
showing  respect  to  friends,  teachers,  masters,  the 
Church,  the  Law,  and  Buddha,  always  girded  for  the 
performance  of  the  duties  of  the  Bodhisattva,  right- 
eous, gentle,  not  deceitful,  not  flattering,  virtuous, 
a  leader  for  the  sake  of  rousing  others  to  perform 
all  good  laws,  producing  by  his  activity  the  ideas  of 
emptiness,  causelessness,  and  purposelessness,  and  he 
was  well  guarded  in  his  speech.  Then,  performing 
the  duties  of  a  Bodhisattva,  after  having  given  up 
all  speaking  which,  when  spoken,  serves  to  injure 
one's  self  or  others  or  both,  he  employed  only  such 
speech  as  served  the  pleasure  and  benefit  of  himself, 
others,  or  both.  And  he  was  so  wise  that,  when 
entering  into  capitals,  kingdoms,  countries,  towns, 
cities,  and  villages,  he  was  always  perfectly  restrained 
with    regard   to  all  objects   of  sense.     Performing 


^  Sukhiloma,  for  sukhulama  or  sukhumala  (i.e.  sukum Ira). 


26  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKhAvAT},  §  10. 

himself  the  duties  of  the  Bodhisattva  without  inter- 
ruption, he  walked  himself  in  the  highest  perfec- 
tion (pdramita)  of  liberality,  and  he  also  roused 
others  to  walk  in  the  same.  And  himself  walking 
in  the  highest  perfections  of  knowledge,  meditation, 
strength,  patience,  and  virtue,  he  roused  others  also 
to  walk  in  the  same.  And  he  has  collected  so  large 
a  stock  of  merit  that,  wherever  he  is  born,  there 
arise  for  him  many  hundreds  of  thousands  of  niyutas 
of  ko/is  of  treasures  from  out  the  earth. 

*  By  him,  while  he  was  thus  performing  the  duties 
of  a  Bodhisattva,  immeasurable  and  innumerable 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  niyutas  of  ko/is  of  beings 
were  established  in  perfect  enlightenment,  of  whom 
it  is  not  easy  to  know  the  limit  by  means  of  speech. 
So  many  immeasurable  and  innumerable  holy  Bud- 
dhas  were  honoured,  revered,  esteemed,  and  wor- 
shipped, and  enabled  to  touch  whatever  causes 
pleasure,  such  as  cloaks,  alms-bowls,  couches,  seats, 
refreshments,  medicines,  and  other  furniture.  It  is 
not  easy  to  know  the  limit  by  pointing  it  out  in 
words,  as  to  how  many  beings  were  established 
by  him  in  the  noble  families  of  Brahma;/as,  Ksha- 
triyas,  ministers,  householders,  and  merchants.  In 
the  same  manner  they  were  established  in  the 
sovereignty  of  6'ambiidvipa  (India),  and  they  were 
established  in  the  character  of  A'akravartins,  Loka- 
pdlas,  ^'akras,  Suydmas,  Sutushitas,  Sunirmitas,Va5a- 
vartins,  Devard^s,  and  IMahabrahmans.  So  many 
immeasurable  and  innumerable  Buddhas  were 
honoured,  revered,  esteemed,  and  worshipped,  and 
requested  to  turn  the  wheel  of  the  Law,  of  whom 
it  is  not  easy  to  know  the  limit  l)y  means  of  words. 

'  And  he  collected   such   virtue,   that  out  of  his 


§  II.  THE   LAND     OF    BLISS.  27 

mouth,  while  performing  the  duties  of  a  Bodhi- 
sattva,  during  immeasurable,  innumerable,  incon- 
ceivable, incomparable,  immense,  measureless,  in- 
expressible ko/is  of  kalpas,  there  breathed  a  sweet 
and  more  than  heavenly  smell  of  sandal-wood. 
From  all  the  pores  of  his  hair  there  arose  the  smell 
of  lotus,  and  he  was  pleasing  to  everybody,  gracious 
and  beautiful,  endowed  with  the  fulness  of  the  best 
bright  colour  \  As  his  body  was  adorned  with 
all  the  good  signs  and  marks,  there  arose  from 
the  pores  (of  his  hair)  and  from  the  palms  of  his 
hands  all  sorts  of  precious  ornaments  in  the  shape 
of  all  kinds  of  cloaks  and  vestments,  in  the  shape 
of  all  kinds  of  flowers,  incense,  scents,  garlands, 
ointments,  umbrellas,  flags,  and  banners,  and  in 
the  shape  of  all  kinds  of  instrumental  music.  And 
there  appeared  also,  streaming  forth  from  the  palms 
of  his  hands,  all  kinds  of  viands  and  drink,  food, 
hard  and  soft,  and  sweetmeats,  and  all  kinds  of 
enjoyments  and  pleasures.  Thus  then  that  Bhikshu 
Dharmakara,  O  Ananda,  had  obtained  the  command 
of  all  necessaries,  after  performing  the  duties  of 
a  Bodhisattva.' 

J  1 1 .  After  this,  the  blessed  Ananda  thus  spoke 
to  the  Bhagavat :  'O  Bhagavat,  has  that  Bhikshu 
Dharmakara,  the  noble-minded  Bodhisattva,  after 
having  obtained  the  highest  perfect  knowledge, 
passed  away,  having  entered  Nirva^m,  or  has  he 
not  yet  been  enlightened,  or  is  he  now  living  and 
enlightened,  and  does  he  dwell  now,  remain,  support 
himself,  and  teach  the  Law  ? ' 

The  Bhagavat  said  :  '  Not  indeed,  O  Ananda,  has 

1  See  Lal.Vist.  p.  337. 


2  8  DESCRIPTION    OF   SUKHAVAt!,  §12, 

that  Tathdgata  passed  away,  nor  has  he  not  yet 
come,  but  the  Tathdgata,  the  holy,  after  having 
obtained  the  highest  perfect  knowledge,  dwells  now, 
remains,  supports  himself,  and  teaches  the  Law,  in 
the  western  quarter,  in  the  Buddha  country,  distant 
from  this  world  by  a  hundred  thousand  niyutas 
of  ko/is  of  Buddha  countries,  in  the  world  which 
is  called  Sukhavati,  being  called  Amitabha,  the 
Tathdgata,  holy  and  fully  enlightened.  He  is  sur- 
rounded by  innumerable  Bodhisattvas,  and  wor- 
shipped by  endless  .Sravakas,  and  in  possession  of 
the  endless  perfection  of  his  Buddha  country. 

J  12.  'And  his  light  is  immeasurable,  so  that  it 
is  not  easy  to  know  the  limit  of  its  measure,  saying, 
he  stands  illuminating  so  many  hundreds  of  Buddha 
countries,  so  many  thousands  of  Buddha  countries, 
so  many  hundred  thousands  of  Buddha  countries, 
so  many  ko/is  of  Buddha  countries,  so  many  hun- 
dred ko/is  of  Buddha  countries,  so  many  thousand 
ko/is  of  Buddha  countries,  so  many  hundred  thou- 
sands of  ko/ls  of  Buddha  countries,  so  many  hundred 
thousands  of  niyutas  of  ko/is  of  Buddha  countries. 
l)ut  indeed,  O  Ananda,  to  put  it  briefly,  a  hundred 
thousand  niyutas  of  ko/is  of  Buddha  countries, 
equal  to  the  sands  of  the  river  Ganga,  are  always 
lighted  up  in  the  eastern  quarter,  by  the  light  of 
that  Bhagavat  Amitdbha.  Thus  on  every  side  in 
the  southern,  western,  northern  quarter,  in  the 
zenith  and  nadir,  in  every  one  of  these  quarters, 
there  are  a  hundred  thousand  niyutas  of  ko/is 
of  Buddha  countries,  like  the  sands  of  the  river 
Gangd,  always  lighted  up  by  the  light  of  that 
Bhagavat  Amitabha,  excepting  the  Buddhas,  the 
Bhagavats,  who,  through  the  practice  of  their  former 


§  12.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  29 

prayers,  have  lighted  up  the  world  by  their  own  light, 
which  is  a  fathom  in  length,  or  by  their  light  which 
is  one,  two,  three,  four,  five,  ten,  twenty,  thirty, 
forty,  or  fifty  yq^^anas  in  length,  or  a  hundred  or 
thousand  or  hundred  thousand  yo^anas  in  length, 
until  their  brightness  reaches  many  hundred  thou- 
sand niyutas  of  ko/is  of  yo^anas  in  length.  There 
is  not,  O  Ananda,  any  case  of  likeness,  by  which 
the  extent  of  the  liorht  of  that  Tathacjata  Ami- 
tabha  could  be  understood.  Hence,  O  Ananda, 
for  that  reason  that  Tathagata  is  called  Amitabha 
(possessed  of  infinite  light),  and  he  is  called  Amita- 
prabha  (possessed  of  infinite  splendour),  Amita- 
prabhasa  (possessed  of  infinite  brilliancy),  Asama- 
ptaprabha  (whose  light  is  never  finished),  Asaiigata- 
prabha  (whose  light  is  not  conditioned),  Prabha- 
^ikhotsr/sh/aprabha  (whose  light  proceeds  from 
flames  of  light),  Sadivyama;nprabha  (whose  light 
is  that  of  heavenly  jewels),  Apratihatara^miraga- 
prabha  (whose  light  has  the  colour  of  unimpeded 
rays),  Ra^aniyaprabha  (possessed  of  beautiful  light), 
Prema/^iyaprabha  (possessed  of  lovely  light),  Pramo- 
daniyaprabha  (possessed  of  delightful  light),  Sahga- 
maniyaprabha  (possessed  of  attractive  light),  Upo- 
sha?ayaprabha  (possessed  of  pleasant  light),  Ani- 
bandhaniyaprabha  ^  (possessed  of  light  that  cannot 
be  stopped),  Ativiryaprabha  (possessed  of  extremely 
powerful  light),  Atulyaprabha  (possessed  of  incom- 
parable light),  Abhibhilyanarendrabhutrayendra- 
prabha^   (possessed  of  light   greater   than  that  of 

'  This  seems  better  than  nibandhaniyaprabha,  as  printed  in 
the  text. 

"^  This  reading  is  conjectural  and  the  translation  doubtful.  Perhaps 
the  te.xt  was  anabhibhijyanarendrabhutrayendra-prabha//. 


^O  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAT?,  §  12. 

the  lords  of  men,  nay,  the  lords  of  the  three 
worlds),  6'rantasa7^/('ayendusurya^ihmikara;/aprabha 
(possessed  of  light  which  bends  the  full  moon  and 
the  sun),  Abhibhuyalokapala.s-akrabrahmajuddhava- 
samahe^-varasarvadeva^ihmikarawaprabha  (possessed 
of  light  which  bends  all  the  conquered  gods,  Mahe- 
rvara,  the  ^'uddhdvdsas,  Brahman,  ^akra,  and  the 
Lokapalas), 

'  This  splendour  of  the  Arya  (noble)  is  pure,  great, 
producing  bodily  pleasure,  happiness  of  mind,  pro- 
ducing happiness,  delight,  and  joy  for  men  and  not- 
men,  Kinnaras,  Mahoragas,  Garurt'as,  Gandharvas, 
Yakshas,  Nagas,  Asuras,  and  Devas  ;  and  producing 
the  pleasure  of  beings  of  good  disposition  \ 

'  And  in  this  manner,  O  Ananda,  the  Tathagata  ^ 
might  speak  for  a  whole  kalpa  on  the  work  of  the 
Tathagata  Amitabha,  beginning  with  his  light,  and 
yet  he  would  not  be  able  to  reach  the  end  of  the 
virtues  of  that  light  of  that  Tathagata,  neither  would 
there  be  any  failure  of  the  self-confidence  in  the 
Tathagata  himself.  And  why  ?  Because,  O  Ananda, 
both  these  things  are  immeasurable,  innumerable, 
inconceivable,  and  endless,  viz.  first,  the  greatness 
of  the  excellence  of  the  light  of  that  Tathagata 
Amitdbha,  the  Bhagavat,  and  secondly,  the  unsur- 
passed lii^ht  of  the  knowledge  possessed  by  the 
Tathagata  (by  myself). 

'  Here  the  text  adds  (p.  30,  1.  4),  kalyakujalamimiweva- 
dvipramodyakarawi.     The  whole  sentence  is  unintelli},nble. 

'  This  refers  to  the  lihagavat  6'akyaniuni  himself,  who  speaks  of 
himself  as  the  Tathagata.  What  he  means  to  say  is  that  the  light  of 
Amitabha  is  infinite  and  that  therefore  even  the  Tathagata  could  not 
finish  the  description  of  it.  Yet  this  would  not  detract  from  the 
infinite  power  of  the  Tathagata  or  diminish  his  vai^aradya 
because  that  power  too  is  infinite. 


§13-  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  3 1 

}  1 3.  '  And,  O  Ananda,  the  assembly  of  the  hearers 
of  that  Tathagata  Amitabha  is  immeasurable,  so  that 
it  is  not  easy  to  learn  its  measure,  so  as  to  be  able 
to  say,  there  are  so  many  ko/is  of  the  hearers, 
so  many  hundreds,  thousands,  hundred-thousands, 
kankaras,  vimbaras,  nayutas  (niyutas  ?),  ayutas,  aksho- 
bhyas,  vivdhas  (masc),  srotas  (?),  o^as\  so  many 
periods,  called  immeasurable,  innumerable,  countless, 
incomparable,  inconceivable.  Now,  for  instance,  O 
Ananda,  the  Bhikshu  Maudgalyayana  having  obtained 
miraculous  power,  might,  if  he  wished,  count  -  in  one 
day  and  night,  how  many  kinds  of  stars  there  are  in 
the  universal  world.  Then,  let  there  be  a  hundred 
thousand  niyutas  of  ko/is  of  such  men,  endowed 
with  miraculous  powers,  and  let  them  do  nothing  else 
but  count  the  first  company  (only)  of  the  hearers  of 
the  Tathagata  Amitabha,  during  a  hundred  thousand 
niyutas  of  ko/is  of  years,  and  yet  by  them  thus 
counting  even  the  hundredth  part  would  not  be 
counted,  even  the  thousandth,  even  the  hundred 
thousandth ;  nay,  not  even  so  far  as  the  minutest 
part,  or  likeness,  or  approach^  towards  it  would  have 
been  counted. 

'  Thus,  for  instance,  O  Ananda,  a  man  might  throw 
out  from  the  great  ocean,  which  is  not  to  be  measured 
across  by  less  than  eighty-four  thousand  yo^^anas, 
one  single  drop  of  water  by  the  sharp  end  of  hair, 
which  is  divided  a  hundred  times.  What  do  you 
think  then,  Ananda, — which  would  be  greater,  one 
drop  of  water  which  has  been   thrown  up  by  the 

^  All  these  are  names  of  fanciful  measures. 
^  Nagare«a, 'with  an  instrument' or  'by  some  clever  contrivance.' 
^  See  Kern's  translation  of  the  Saddharmapuw^arika,  p.   317, 
note  2. 


32  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAxi,  §  14. 

sharp  pointed  hair  divided  a  hundred  times,  or  the 
mass  of  water  left  in  the  great  ocean  ?' 

Ananda  said  :  '  Even  a  thousand  yoi^anas,  O  Bha- 
gavat,  would  be  a  small  portion  of  the  great  ocean, 
how  much  more  then  one  drop  of  water  thrown  out 
by  the  sharp  pointed  hair  divided  a  hundred  times ! ' 

Bhagavat  said  :  '  As  that  one  drop  of  water,  exactly 
so  large  (so  small  in  proportion)  was  the  first  company 
of  the  hearers.  And  let  there  be  reckoninof  made 
b}-  those  Bhikshus,  who  are  like  Maudgalyayana, 
counting  for  a  hundred  thousand  niyutas  of  ko/is 
of  years,  and  yet,  as  to  the  mass  of  water  left  in  the 
great  ocean,  it  would  even  then  have  to  be  con- 
sidered as  not  counted.  How  much  more  with  regard 
to  the  second,  third,  and  the  rest  of  the  companies  of 
the  hearers  !  Therefore  the  mass  of  hearers  of  the 
Bhagavat  is  endless  and  boundless,  and  receives  the 
name  of  "  immeasurable  and  innumerable." 

§  14.  'And,  O  Ananda,  the  length  of  the  life  of 
that  Bhagavat  Amitibha,  the  Tathagata,  is  immeasur- 
able, so  that  it  is  not  easy  to  know  its  length,  so  as 
to  be  able  to  say  (that  it  comprises)  so  many  hundreds 
of  kalpas,  so  many  thousands  of  kalpas,  so  many 
hundred  thousands  of  kalpas,  so  many  ko/is  of  kalpas, 
so  many  hundreds  of  ko/is  of  kalpas,  so  many  thou- 
sands of  ko/is  of  kalpas,  so  many  hundred  thousands 
of  ko/is  of  kalpas,  so  many  hundred  thousands  of 
niyutas  of  ko/is  of  kalpas.  Therefore,  O  Ananda, 
the  limit  of  the  measure  of  the  life  of  that  Bhagavat 
is  immeasurable  indeed.  Therefore  that  Tathdgata 
is  called  AmitAyus. 

'  And  as,  O  Ananda,  the  rule  of  making  known  the 
reckoning  of  kalpas  exists  here  in  this  world,  ten 
kali)as  have  passed  now  since  Bhagavat  Amitdyus, 


§  l6.  THE   LAND    OF    BLISS.  33 


the  Tathagata,  arose  and  awoke  to  the  highest  perfect 
knowledore. 

J  1 5.  '  And,  O  Ananda,  the  world  called  Sukhavati 
belonging  to  that  Bhagavat  Amitabha  is  prosperous, 
rich,  good  to  live  in,  fertile,  lovely,  and  filled  with 
many  gods  and  men.  Then,  O  Ananda,  in  that 
world  there  are  neither  hells,  nor  the  brute  creation, 
nor  the  realm  of  departed  spirits,  nor  bodies  of 
Asuras,  nor  untimely  births  \  And  there  do  not 
appear  in  this  world  such  gems  as  are  known  in  the 
world  Sukhavati. 

§  16.  '  Now,  O  Ananda,  that  world  Sukhavati  is 
fragrant  with  several  sweet-smelling  scents,  rich  in 
manifold  flowers  and  fruits,  adorned  with  gem  trees, 
and  frequented  by  tribes  of  manifold  sweet-voiced 
birds,  which  have  been  made  by  the  Tathagata  (on 
purpose  -).  And,  O  Ananda,  those  gem  trees  are  of 
several  colours,  of  many  colours,  and  of  many  hun- 
dred thousand  colours.  There  are  gem  trees  there 
of  golden-colour,  and  made  of  gold.  There  are 
those  of  silver-colour,  and  made  of  silver.  There 
are  those  of  beryl-colour,  and  made  of  beryl.  There 
are  those  of  crystal-colour,  and  made  of  cr}stal. 
There  are  those  of  coral-colour,  and  made  of  coral. 
There  are  those  of  red  pearl-colour,  and  made  of 
red  pearls.  There  are  those  of  diamond-colour,  and 
made  of  diamonds. 

'  There  are  some  trees  of  two  gems,  viz.  gold  and 
silver.  There  are  some  of  three  gems,  viz.  gold, 
silver,  and  beryl.     There  are   some  of  four  gems, 

'  These  untimely  births,  i.  e.  being  born  out  of  time,  when  there 
are  no  Buddhas  to  hsten  to,  are  not  mentioned  in  the  first  Prawi- 
dhana ;  nor  the  jewels. 

2  Cf.  the  eighth  paragraph  in  the  Smaller  Sukhavali-vyQlia. 

[49]  *  ^ 


34  DESCRIPTION   OF  SUKHAVAtJ,  §  i6. 

viz.  gold,  silver,  beryl,  and  crystal.  There  are  some 
of  five  gems,  viz.  gold,  silver,  beryl,  crystal,  and 
coral.  There  are  some  of  six  gems,  viz.  gold, 
silver,  beryl,  crystal,  coral,  and  red  pearls.  There 
are  some  of  seven  gems,  viz.  gold,  silver,  beryl, 
cry^stal,  coral,  red  pearls,  and  diamonds  as  the 
seventh. 

'  And  there,  O  Ananda,  of  the  trees  made  of  gold, 
the  flowers,  leaves,  small  branches,  branches,  trunks, 
and  roots  are  made  of  gold,  and  the  fruits  are  made 
of  silver.  Of  trees  made  of  silver,  the  flowers, 
leaves,  small  branches,  branches,  trunks,  and  roots 
are  made  of  silver  only,  and  the  fruits  are  made  of 
beryl.  Of  trees  made  of  beryl,  the  flowers,  leaves, 
small  branches,  branches,  trunks,  and  roots  are  made 
of  beryl,  and  the  fruits  are  made  of  crystal.  Of 
trees  made  of  crystal,  the  flowers,  leaves,  small 
branches,  branches,  trunks,  and  roots  are  made  of 
crystal  only,  and  the  fruits  are  made  of  coral.  Of 
trees  made  of  coral,  the  flowers,  leaves,  small 
branches,  branches,  trunks,  and  roots  are  made  of 
coral  only,  and  the  fruits  are  made  of  red  pearls. 
Of  trees  made  of  red  pearls,  the  flowers,  leaves, 
small  branches,  branches,  trunks,  and  roots  are 
made  of  red  pearls  only,  and  the  fruits  are  made  of 
diamonds.  Of  trees  made  of  diamonds,  the  flowers, 
leaves,  small  branches,  branches,  trunks,  and  roots 
are  made  of  diamonds  only,  and  the  fruits  are  made 
of  gold. 

'  Of  some  trees,  O  Ananda,  the  roots  are  made 
of  gold,  the  trunks  of  silver,  the  branches  of  beryl, 
the  small  branches  of  crystal,  the  leaves  of  coral, 
the  flowers  of  red  pearls,  and  the  fruits  of  diamonds. 
Of  some  trees,  O  Ananda,  the   roots  arc  made  of 


§  l6.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  35 

silver,  the  trunks  of  beryl,  the  branches  of  crystal, 
the  small  branches  of  coral,  the  leaves  of  red  pearls, 
the  flowers  of  diamonds,  and  the  fruits  of  gold.  Of 
some  trees,  O  Ananda,  the  roots  are  made  of  beryl, 
the  trunks  of  crystal,  the  branches  of  coral,  the 
small  branches  of  red  pearls,  the  leaves  of  diamonds, 
the  flowers  of  gold,  and  the  fruits  of  silver.  Of 
some  trees,  O  Ananda,  the  roots  are  made  of  crystal, 
the  trunks  of  coral,  the  branches  of  red  pearls,  the 
small  branches  of  diamonds,  the  leaves  of  gold,  the 
flowers  of  silver,  and  the  fruits  of  beryl.  Of  some 
trees,  O  Ananda,  the  roots  are  made  of  coral,  the 
trunks  of  red  pearls,  the  branches  of  diamonds, 
the  small  branches  of  gold,  the  leaves  of  silver,  the 
flowers  of  beryl,  and  the  fruits  of  crystal.  Of  some 
trees,  O  Ananda,  the  roots  are  made  of  red  pearls, 
the  trunks  of  diamonds,  the  branches  of  gold,  the 
small  branches  of  silver,  the  leaves  of  beryl,  the 
flowers  of  crystal,  and  the  fruits  of  coral.  Of  some 
trees,  O  Ananda,  the  roots  are  made  of  diamonds, 
the  trunks  of  gold,  the  branches  of  silver,  the  small 
branches  of  beryl,  the  leaves  of  crystal,  the  flowers 
of  coral,  and  the  fruits  of  red  pearls.  Of  some 
trees,  O  Ananda,  the  roots  are  made  of  the  seven 
gems,  the  trunks  of  the  seven  gems,  the  branches 
of  the  seven  gems,  the  small  branches  of  the  seven 
gems,  the  leaves  of  the  seven  gems,  the  flowers 
of  the  seven  gems,  and  the  fruits  of  the  seven 
gems. 

*  And,  O  Ananda,  the  roots,  trunks,  branches, 
small  branches,  leaves,  flowers,  and  fruits  of  all 
those  trees  are  pleasant  to  touch,  and  fragrant.  And, 
when  those  (trees)  are  moved  by  the  wind,  a  sweet 
and   delightful   sound    proceeds   from    them,   never 

*  D  2 


36  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAtJ.  §  17. 

tiring,  and  never  disagreeable  to  hear.  That  Bud- 
dha country,  O  Ananda,  is  always  on  every  side 
surrounded  by  such  trees  made  of  the  seven  gems, 
by  masses  of  Kadali  (banana)  trees,  and  rows  of 
palm-trees  made  of  the  seven  gems,  and  entirely 
surrounded  with  golden  nets,  and  wholly  covered 
with  lotus  flowers,  made  of  all  kinds  of  gems. 

*  There  are  lotus  flowers  there,  half  a  yq^ana  in 
circumference.  There  are  others,  one  yo^ana  in 
circumference  ;  and  others,  two,  three,  four,  or  five 
yo^anas  in  circumference;  nay,  there  are  some, 
as  much  as  ten  yo^'anas  in  circumference.  And 
from  each  gem-lotus  there  proceed  thirty-six  hun- 
dred thousand  ko/is  of  rays  of  light.  And  from 
each  ray  of  light  there  proceed  thirty-six  hundred 
thousand  ko/is  of  Buddhas,  with  bodies  of  golden- 
colour,  possessed  of  the  thirty-two  marks  of  great 
men,  who  go  and  teach  the  Law  to  beings  in 
the  immeasurable  and  innumerable  worlds  in  the 
eastern  quarter.  Thus  also  in  the  southern,  western, 
and  northern  quarters,  above  and  below,  in  the 
cardinal  and  intermediate  points,  they  go  their  way 
to  the  immeasurable  and  innumerable  worlds  and 
teach  the  Law  to  beinofs  in  the  whole  world. 

^17.'  And  again,  O  Ananda,  there  are  no  black 
mountains  anywhere  in  that  Buddha  country,  nor 
anywhere  jewel  mountains,  nor  anywhere  Sumerus, 
kings  of  mountains,  nor  anywhere  A'akraviWas,  great 
A'akrava^/as,  kings  of  mountains.  And  that  Buddha 
country  is  level  on  every  side,  lovely,  like  the  palm 
of  the  hand,  with  districts  full  of  jewels  and  treasures 
of  every  kind.' 

After  this,  the  blessed  Ananda  spoke  thus  to  the 
Bhagavat :   '  But  in  that  case,  O   Bhagavat,  where 


§  i8.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  ^J 

do  the  gods  consisting-  of  the  companies  of  the  four 
Maharajas  who  dwell  on  the  side  of  the  Sumeru, 
and  where  do  the  Trajastriw^a  gods  who  dwell  on 
the  top  of  the  Sumeru,  find  their  place  ? ' 

Bhagavat  said  :  '  What  do  you  think,  O  Ananda, 
where  do  these  other  beings  find  their  place,  who  in 
this  world  dwell  above  the  king  of  mountains, 
Sumeru,  namely,  the  Yamadevas,  Tushitas,  Nir- 
ma?2aratis,  Paranirmitavai-avartins,  Brahmakayikas, 
Brahmapurohitas,  Mahabrahmans,  as  far  as  the 
Akanish//^as  ? ' 

Ananda  replied :  '  O  Bhagavat,  the  result  of 
works  and  the  outcome  of  works  are  inconceivable ' 
(i.e.  I  do  not  understand  it). 

Bhagavat  said  :  '  Here,  you  see,  the  result  of 
works  and  the  outcome  of  works  are  inconceivable. 
But  to  the  blessed  Buddhas  the  position  of  Buddhas 
is  not  inconceivable,  while  to  thee  the  holy  and 
miraculous  power  of  virtuous  beings,  whose  stock  of 
merit  has  become  ripened,  seems  inconceivable.' 

Ananda  said  :  '  I  had  no  doubt  on  this,  no  difference 
of  opinion,  or  hesitation  ;  on  the  contrary,  I  ask  only 
the  Tathagata  about  this  matter  in  order  to  destroy 
the  doubts,  the  differences  of  opinion,  and  the  hesita- 
tions of  future  beings.' 

Bhagavat  said  :  '  All  right,  Ananda,  this  is  what 
you  ought  to  do. 

J  1 8.  'In  that  world  Sukhavati,  O  Ananda,  there 
flow  different  kinds  of  rivers  ;  there  are  great  rivers 
there,  one  yo^ana  in  breadth  ;  there  are  rivers  up  to 
twenty,  thirty,  forty,  fifty  yo^anas  in  breadth,  and  up 
to  twelve  yo^anas  in  depth.  All  these  rivers  are 
delightful,  carrying  water  of  different  sweet  odour, 
carrying  bunches  of  flowers  adorned  with  various 


38  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVATt  §  i8. 


gems,  resounding  wiih  sweet  voices.  ^  And,  O 
Ananda,  there  proceeds  from  an  instrument  which 
consists  of  hundred  thousand  ko/ls  of  parts,  which 
embodies  heavenly  music  and  is  played  by  clever 
people,  the  same  delightful  sound  which  proceeds 
from  those  great  rivers,  the  sound  which  is  deep, 
unknown,  incomprehensible,  clear,  pleasant  to  the 
ear,  touching  the  heart,  beloved,  sweet,  delightful, 
never  tiring,  never  disagreeable,  pleasant  to  hear,  as 
if  it  always  said,  "  Non-eternal,  peaceful,  unreal." 
Such  a  sound  comes  to  be  heard  by  these  beings. 

'  And  again,  O  Ananda,  the  borders  of  those  great 
rivers  on  both  sides  are  filled  with  jewel  trees  of 
various  scents,  from  which  bunches  of  flowers,  leaves, 
and  branches  of  all  kinds  hang  down.  And  if  the 
beines,  who  are  on  the  borders  of  those  rivers,  wish 
to  enjoy  sport  full  of  heavenly  delights,  the  water 
rises  to  the  ankle  only  after  they  have  stepped  into 
the  rivers,  if  they  wish  it  to  be  so ;  or  if  they  wish 
it,  the  water  rises  to  their  knees,  to  their  hips,  to 
their  sides,  and  to  their  ears.  And  heavenly 
pleasures  arise.  Again,  if  the  beings  then  wish  the 
water  to  be  cold,  it  is  cold  ;  if  they  wish  it  to  be  hot, 
it  is  hot ;  if  they  wish  it  to  be  hot  and  cold,  it  is  hot 
and  cold,  according  to  their  pleasure. 

'  And  those  great  rivers  flow  along,  full  of  water 
scented  with  the  best  perfumes  of  the  Uragasara 
sandal-wood,  of  Tagaras,  K^lanusarin  (dark,  fragrant 
sandal-wood)  trees,  Agarus,  and  heavenly  Tamdla- 
pattras  ;  covered  with  flowers  of  the  white  water- 
lilies,  and  heavenly  Utpalas,  Padmas,  Kumudas,  and 
Pu^<^arikas ;   full  of  delightful  sounds  of  peacocks, 

*  Instead  of  tdsim,  it  is  better  to  read  tailid. 


§l8.  THE   LAND    OF    BLISS.  39 

sparrows,  ku^^alas,  cuckoos,  i-arikas,  parrots,  ducks, 
geese,  herons,  cranes,  swans  ^  and  others  ;  with  small 
islands  inhabited  by  flocks  of  birds,  created  by  the 
Tathagata ;  adorned  with  fields,  full  of  metals ;  with 
fords  on  which  it  is  easy  to  drink,  free  from  mud, 
and  covered  with  gold  dust.  And  when  these 
beings  there  desire,  thinking  what  kind  of  wishes 
should  be  fulfilled  for  them,  then  exactly  such  wishes 
are  fulfilled  for  them  according  to  the  Law  ^. 

'  And,  O  Ananda,  the  sound  which  rises  from  that 
water  is  delightful,  and  the  whole  Buddha  country  is 
aroused  by  it.  And  if  beings,  who  stand  on  the  borders 
of  the  river,  wish  that  the  sound  should  not  come 
within  their  ear-shot,  then  it  does  not  come  within  their 
ear-shot,  even  if  they  are  possessed  of  the  heavenly 
ear.  And  whatever  sound  a  man  wishes  to  hear, 
exactly  that  delightful  sound  he  hears,  as  for  instance, 
the  sound  "  Buddha,  Dharma  (the  Law),  Sangha  (the 
Church),  the  Paramitas  (highest  perfections),  the 
Bhtimis  (stages),  the  Balas  (powers),  Vai^aradya 
(perfections),  Ave/^ikabuddhadharma  (freedom  from 
attachment),  Pratisa;;2vit  (consciousness) ;  ^'unyata 
(emptiness),  Animitta  (unconditioned),  Apra7nhita  (free 
from  desire),  Anabhisawskara  (not  made),  A^ata  (not 
born),  Anutpada  (without  origin),  Abh^va  (not  being), 
and  Nirodha  (cessation) ;  KS'anta,pra.yanta,andupa5anta 
(peace);  Mahamaitri  (great  love),  Mahakaru;za  (great 
pity),  Mahamudita  (great  rejoicing),  and  Mahopek- 
sh^  (great  forgiveness) ;   Anutpattikadharmakshanti 

'  The  Tibetan  translation  puts  these  birds  as  follows:  geese, 
swans,  cranes,  ducks,  kara««/avas,  parrots,  grouse  (kokilas),  kuwalas, 
kalavihkas,  and  peacocks. 

2  Instead  of  Dharma/^,  the  Tibetan  translator  seems  to  have 
read  Dharmavat. 


40  DESCRIPTION    OF   SUKHAVATt,  §  19. 

(resignation  to  consequences  which  have  not  yet 
arisen),  and  AbhishekabhClmipratilambha (attainment 
of  the  royal  stage)." 

'And  having  heard  these  sounds,  everybody  feels 
the  highest  delight  and  pleasure  accompanied  by 
retirement,  passionlessness,  quiet,  cessation,  law,  and 
a  stock  of  merit  leading  to  the  perfect  knowledge. 

'  And,  O  Ananda,  there  is  nowhere  in  that  Sukha- 
vati  world  any  sound  of  sin,  obstacle,  misfortune, 
distress,  and  destruction ;  there  is  nowhere  any 
sound  of  pain,  even  the  sound  of  perceiving  what 
is  neither  pain  nor  pleasure  is  not  there,  O  Ananda, 
how  much  less  the  sound  of  pain.  For  that  reason, 
O  Ananda,  that  world  is  called  Sukhavati,  shortly, 
but  not  in  full.  For,  O  Ananda,  the  whole  kalpa 
would  come  to  an  end,  while  the  different  causes  of 
the  pleasure  of  the  world  Sukhavati  are  being  praised, 
and  even  then  the  end  of  those  causes  of  happiness 
could  not  be  reached. 

^19.'  And  again,  O  Ananda,  the  beings,  who  have 
been  and  will  be  born  in  that  world  Sukhavati,  will 
be  endowed  with  such  colour,  strength,  vigour, 
height  and  breadth,  dominion,  accumulation  of 
virtue '  ;  with  such  enjoyments  of  dress,  ornaments, 
gardens,  palaces,  and  pavilions  ;  and  such  enjoyments 
of  touch,  taste,  smell,  and  sound ;  in  fact  with  all 
enjoyments  and  pleasures,  exactly  like  the  Paranir- 
mitavajavartin  gods. 

'  And  again,  O  Ananda,  in  that  world  Sukhavati, 
beings  do  not  take  food  consisting  of  gross  materials 
of  gravy  or  molasses ;  but  whatever  food  they 
desire,  such  food  they  perceive,  as  if  it  were  taken, 

'   Ilcrc  llic  text  sc'cms  corrupt. 


§  ip.  THE   LAND    OF    BLISS.  4T 

and  become  delighted  in  body  and  mind.  Yet  they 
need  not  put  it  into  their  mouth. 

'  And  if,  after  they  are  satisfied,  they  wish  different 
kinds  of  perfumes,  then  with  these  very  heavenly 
kinds  of  perfumes  the  whole  Buddha  country  is 
scented.  And  whosoever  wishes  to  perceive  there 
such  perfume,  every  perfume  of  every  scent  of  the 
Gandharvara^a  does  always  reach  his  nose  \ 

'  And  in  the  same  manner,  if  they  desire  musical 
instruments,  banners,  flags,  umbrellas,  cloaks,  pow- 
ders, ointments,  garlands,  and  scents,  then  the  whole 
Buddha  country  shines  with  such  things.  If  they 
desire  cloaks  of  different  colours  and  many  hundred 
thousand  colours,  then  with  these  very  best  cloaks 
the  whole  Buddha  country  shines.  And  the  people 
feel  themselves  covered  with  them. 

'  And  if  they  desire  such  ornaments,  as  for  in- 
stance, head-ornaments,  ear-ornaments,  neck-orna- 
ments, hand  and  foot  ornaments,  namely,  diadems, 
earrings,  bracelets,  armlets,  necklaces,  chains,  ear- 
jewels,  seals,  gold  strings,  girdles,  gold  nets  ^  pearl 
nets,  jewel  nets,  nets  of  bells  made  of  gold  and 
jewels,  then  they  see  that  Buddha  country  shining 
with  such  ornaments  adorned  with  many  hundred 
thousand  jewels,  that  are  fastened  to  ornament- 
trees.  And  they  perceive  themselves  to  be  adorned 
with  these  ornaments. 

'And  if  they  desire  a  palace,  with  colours  and 
emblems  of  such  and  such  height  and  width,  adorned 
with   hundred   thousand  gates  made  with  different 

^  The  Tibetan  translator  seems  to  have  read:  tatra  yas  tawz 
gandham  aghratukamo  na  bhavati,  tasya  sarvajo  gandhasa«^«a 
vasana  ^a  na  samuda>tarati. 

'  The  Tibetan  translation  suggests  the  reading  svarwa^ala. 


42  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAtJ,  §20. 

jewels,  covered  with  different  heavenly  flowers  \  full 
of  couches  strewn  with  beautiful  cushions,  then 
exactly  such  a  palace  appears  before  them.  And 
in  these  delightful  palaces  they  dw^ell,  play,  sport, 
walk  about,  being  honoured,  and  surrounded  by 
seven  times  seven  thousands  of  Apsarases. 

§  20.  '  And  in  that  world,  there  is  no  difference 
between  gods  and  men,  except  when  they  are  spoken 
of  in  ordinary  and  imperfect  parlance  as  gods  and 
men.  And,  O  Ananda,  as  a  low  man  and  impo- 
tent man,  before  the  face  of  the  mighty  king,  is 
neither  bright,  nor  warm,  nor  brilliant,  nor  is  he 
self-confident  and  radiant, — thus  ^'akra,  king  of  the 
Devas,  if  before  the  face  of  the  Paranirmitava^a- 
vartin  gods,  is  neither  bright,  nor  warm,  nor  brilliant, 
namely,  with  regard  to  his  gardens,  palaces,  dresses, 
ornaments,  his  dominion,  his  perfection,  his  miracu- 
lous power,  or  his  supremacy,  his  comprehension  of 
the  Law,  and  his  full  enjoyment  of  the  Law.  And, 
O  Ananda,  as  the  Paranirmitava^avartin  gods  are 
there,  thus  men  must  be  considered  in  the  world 
Sukhavati. 

§  21.  *  And  again,  O  Ananda,  in  that  world  Sukha- 
vati, when  the  time  of  forenoon  has  come,  the  wunds 
are  greatly  agitated  and  blowing  everywhere  in  the 
four  quarters.  And  they  shake  and  drive  many 
beautiful,  graceful,  and  many-coloured  stalks  of  the 
gem  trees,  which  are  perfumed  with  sweet  heavenly 
scents,  so  that  many  hundred  beautiful  flowers  of 
delightful  scent  fall  down  on  the  great  earth,  which 
is  all  full  of  jewels.     And  with  these  flowers  that 


*  Instead  of  pushpa  the  Til^etan  translator  seems  to  have  read 
dOshya,  'garment.' 


§23*  THE   LAND    OF    BLISS.  43 

Buddha  country  is  adorned  on  every  side  seven 
fadioms  deep.  As  a  clever  man  might  spread 
out  a  flower-bed  on  the  earth  and  make  it  even 
with  both  his  hands,  beautiful  and  charming,  even 
thus  with  those  flowers  of  various  scents  and  colours 
that  Buddha  country  is  shining  on  every  side  seven 
fathoms  deep.  And  these  many  flowers  are  soft, 
pleasant  to  touch,  if  one  may  use  a  comparison,  like 
Ka/§ilindika  (some  kind  of  soft  substance).  If  one  puts 
one's  foot  on  them,  they  sink  down  four  inches  ;  if  one 
raises  one's  foot,  they  rise  again  four  inches.  When  the 
time  of  the  forenoon  has  gone  again,  those  flowers 
vanish  without  leaving  anything  behind.  Then  that 
Buddha  country  is  again  clean,  pleasant,  beautiful, 
and  without  fading  flowers.  The  winds  blow  again 
everywhere  in  the  four  quarters,  and  scatter  down 
fresh  flowers  as  before.  And  as  it  is  in  the  fore- 
noon, so  it  is  at  noon,  at  twilight,  in  the  first, 
middle,  and  last  watch  of  the  night.  And  the 
beings,  if  touched  by  those  winds  which  blow  per- 
fume with  various  scents,  are  as  full  of  happiness  as 
a  Bhikshu  (mendicant)  who  has  obtained  Nirvawa. 

§2  2.  'And  in  that  Buddha  country,  O  Ananda, 
no  mention  is  ever  made  of  the  names  of  fire, 
sun,  moon,  planets,  Nakshatras  (constellations),  and 
stars,  or  of  blinding  darkness.  There  is  no  men- 
tion even  of  day  and  night,  except  in  the  conver- 
sation of  the  Tathagata.  Nor  is  there  any  idea  of 
predial  property  belonging  to  monasteries. 

J  23.  '  And  again,  O  Ananda,  in  that  world  Sukha- 
vati  at  the  proper  time  clouds  full  of  heavenly  per- 
fumed water  pour  down  heavenly  flowers  of  all 
colours ;  heavenly  seven  jewels,  heavenly  sandal- 
wood-powder,  and   heavenly  umbrellas,   flags,  and 


44  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVATI,  §24. 

banners  are  poured  down.  And  in  the  sky,  the 
heavenly  flowers  of  all  colours,  and  heavenly  cano- 
pies are  held,  likewise  heavenly  excellent  umbrellas 
and  all  kinds  of  ornaments,  heavenly  musical  instru- 
ments are  played,  and  heavenly  Apsarases  dance, 

§  24.  '  And  again,  O  Ananda,  in  that  Buddha 
country  whatever  beings  have  been  born,  and 
are  being  born,  and  will  be  born,  are  always 
constant  in  absolute  truth,  till  they  have  reached 
Nirvdwa.  And  why  is  that  ?  Because  there  is  no 
room  or  mention  there  of  the  other  two  divisions 
(rd^is),  such  as  beings  not  constant  or  constant  in 
falsehood. 

'  On  this  wise,  O  Ananda,  that  world  is  briefly 
called  Sukhavati,  not  at  full  length.  Even  a  kalpa, 
O  Ananda,  would  come  to  an  end,  while  the  causes 
of  happiness  which  exist  in  that  world  Sukhavati 
are  being  praised,  and  yet  it  would  be  impossible  to 
reach  the  end  of  them.' 

f  25.  Then  the  Bhagavat  at  that  time  spoke  the 
following  verses  ^ : 

'  Thus,  O  Ananda,  the  world  Sukhavati  is  endowed 
with  immeasurable  good  qualities  and  excellences. 

§  26.  'And  again,  O  Ananda,  in  the  ten  quarters, 
and  in  each  of  them,  in  all  the  Buddha  countries 
equal    in    number  to   the  sand   of  the  Gaiiga,  the 

'  The  text  of  these  verses  is  so  corrupt  that  I  thought  it  best  to 
follow  the  example  of  the  five  Chinese  translators,  all  of  whom 
leave  them  out.  They  only  repeat  what  was  said  before,  that  people 
might  go  on  for  ever  praising  the  excellences  of  Sukhavati,  yet  they 
would  never  reach  the  end  of  them,  and  that  the  merit  of  hearing  even 
the  name  of  Sukhavati  is  greater  than  all  other  blessings  on  earth. 
The  best  thing,  however,  is  to  have  faith  in  Gina,  and  to  drive  away 
all  doubt.  The  Tibetan  translator  gives  a  translation  of  seven 
verses,  but  his  translation  also  seems  as  obscure  as  the  original. 


§  28.  THE   LAND   OF    BLISS.  45 

blessed  Buddhas  equal  in  number  to  the  sand  of  the 
Gahga,  glorify  the  name  of  the  blessed  Amitabha, 
the  Tathagata,  they  preach  his  fame,  they  proclaim 
his  glory,  they  extol  his  virtue.  And  why  ? 
Because  all  beings  who  hear  the  name  of  the 
blessed  Amitabha,  and  having  heard  it,  raise  their 
thought  with  joyful  longing,  even  for  once  only, 
will  not  turn  away  again  from  the  highest  perfect 
knowledge. 

J  27.  'And  before  the  eyes  of  those  beings,  O 
Ananda,  who  again  and  again  think  of  the  Tathagata 
reverently,  and  who  make  the  great  and  unmeasured 
stock  of  good  works  grow,  turning  their  thought 
towards  Bodhi  (knowledge),  and  who  pray  to  be 
born  in  that  world,  Amitabha,  the  Tathagata,  holy 
and  fully  enlightened,  when  the  time  of  their  death 
has  approached,  will  appear,  surrounded  by  many 
companies  of  Bhikshus  and  honoured  by  them.  And 
then  these  beings,  having  seen  the  Bhagavat,  their 
thoughts  filled  with  joy,  will,  when  they  have  died,  be 
born  in  that  world  of  Sukhavati.  And  if,  O  Ananda, 
any  son  or  daughter  of  a  good  family  should  wish 
— What  ? — How  then  may  I  see  that  Tathagata 
Amitabha  visibly,  then  he  must  raise  his  thought 
on  to  the  highest  perfect  knowledge,  he  must  direct 
his  thought  with  perseverance  and  excessive  desire 
towards  that  Buddha  country,  and  direct  the  stock 
of  his  good  works  towards  being  born  there. 

§  28.  '  But  before  the  eyes  of  those  who  do  not 
care  much  about  the  Tathagata  Amitabha,  and  who 
do  not  vigorously  increase  the  great  and  unmeasured 
stock  of  their  good  works,  the  Tathagata  Amitabha, 
holy  and  fully  enlightened,  will  appear,  at  the  time 
of  death,  with  the  company  of  Bhikshus,  in  breadth 


46  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVATJ,  §  29. 

and  height  and  form  and  beauty,  very  like  (the 
former),  and  very  like  (the  real  Tathagata),  but 
only  created  by  thought.  And  they,  through  their 
nietlitation  that  dwells  on  perceiving  the  sight  of 
the  Tathagata,  and  with  unfailing  memory,  will, 
when  they  have  died,  be  born  in  the  same  Buddha 
country. 

§  29.  '  And  again,  O  Ananda,  those  beings  who 
meditate  on  the  Tathagata  by  giving  him  the  ten 
thoughts,  and  who  will  direct  their  desire  towards 
that  Buddha  country,  and  who  will  feci  satisfaction 
when  the  profound  doctrines  are  being  preached,  and 
who  will  not  fall  off,  nor  despair,  nor  fail,  but  will 
meditate  on  that  Tathagata,  if  it  were  by  one 
thouMit  only,  and  will  direct  their  desire  toward 
that  Buddha  country,  they  also  will  see  the  Tatha- 
gata Amitabha,  while  they  are  in  a  dream,  they  will 
be  born  in  the  world  Sukhavati,  and  will  never  turn 
away  from  the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

§  30.  'And,  O  Ananda,  after  thus  seeing  the  cause 
and  effect,  the  Tathdgatas  of  the  ten  quarters,  in  im- 
measurable and  innumerable  worlds,  glorify  the 
name  of  the  Tathagata  Amitabha,  preach  his  fame, 
and  proclaim  his  praise.  And  again,  O  Ananda,  in 
that  Buddha  country,  Bodhisattvas  equal  in  number 
to  the  sand  of  the  Gang4  approach,  from  the  ten 
quarters,  and  in  each  quarter  towards  that  Tathagata 
Amitabha,  in  order  to  see  him,  to  bow  before  him, 
to  worship  him,  to  consult  him,  and  likewise  in  order 
to  see  that  company  of  Bodhisattvas,  and  the  dif- 
ferent kinds  of  perfection  in  the  multitude  of  orna- 
ments and  excellences  belon<nnLr  to  that  Buddha 
country.' 

{31.  Then  at  that  time,  the  Bhagavat,  in  order 


§31.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  47 


to   illustrate   this  matter  in  fuller  measure,  recited 
these  verses  ^ : 

1.  'As  there  are  Buddha  countries  equal  to  the 
sand  of  the  river  Garigi  in  the  eastern  quarter, 
whence  all  the  Bodhisattvas  come  to  worship  the 
Buddha,  the  lord  Amitayu  ; 

2.  '  And  they  having  taken  many  bunches  of 
flowers  of  different  colours,  sweetly-scented  and 
delightful,  shower  them  down  on  the  best  leader  of 
men,  on  Amitayu,  worshipped  by  gods  and  men  ; — 

3.  '  In  the  same  manner  there  are  as  many  Bud- 
dha countries  in  the  southern,  western,  and  northern 
quarters,  whence  they  come  with  the  Bodhisattvas 
to  worship  the  Buddha,  the  lord  Amitayu. 

4.  'And  they  having  taken  many  handfulls  of 
scents  of  different  colours,  sweetly-scented  and 
delightful,  shower  them  down  on  the  best  leader 
of  men,  on  Amitayu,  worshipped  by  gods  and  men. 

5.  '  These  many  Bodhisattvas  having  worshipped 
and  revered  the  feet  of  Amitaprabha,  and  having 
walked  round  him  respectfully,  speak  thus  :  "  Oh, 
the  country  of  Buddha  shines  wonderfully  !  " 

6.  'And  they  cover  him  again  with  handfulls  of 
flowers,  with  thoughts  jubilant,  with  incomparable 
joy,  and  proclaim  their  wish  before  that  lord  :  "  May 
our  country  also  be  such  as  this." 

7.  'And  what  was  thrown  there  as  handfulls  of 
flowers  arose  in  the  form  of  an  umbrella  extending 
over  a  hundred  yq^anas,  and  the  beautiful  country 
shines  and  is  well  adorned,  and  flowers  cover  the 
whole  body  of  Buddha. 


^  In  these  verses  there  are  again  many  doubtful  passages  which 
could  be  rendered  tentatively  only. 


48  DESCRIPTION   OF   SUKHAVATt,  §31. 

8.  '  These  Bodhisattvas  having  thus  honoured 
him,  how  do  they  act  ? — Delighted  they  pronounce 
this  speech  :  "  Gains  by  those  people  are  well  gained, 
by  whom  the  name  of  the  best  man  has  been  heard. 

9.  '  "  By  us  also  all  the  gain  has  been  well  gained, 
because  we  have  come  to  this  Buddha  country. 
See  this  dream-like  country  ^  how  beautiful  it  is, 
which  was  made  by  the  teacher  during  a  hundred 
thousand  kalpas. 

10.  '"Look,  the  Buddha  possessed  of  a  mass  of 
the  best  virtues  shines,  surrounded  by  Bodhisattvas. 
Endless  is  his  splendour  2,  and  endless  the  light, 
and  endless  the  life,  and  endless  the  assembly." 

11.  'And  the  lord  Amitayu  makes  a  smile  of 
thirty-six  niyutas  of  ko/is  of  rays,  which  rays  having 
issued  from  the  circle  of  his  mouth  light  up  the 
thousand  ko/is  of  Buddha  countries. 

12.  'And  all  these  rays  having  returned  there 
again  settle  on  the  head  of  the  lord ;  gods  and  men 
produce  (perceive)  the  delight,  because  they  have 
seen  there  this  light  of  him. 

13.  'There  rises  the  Buddha-son,  glorious,  he  in- 
deed the  mighty  Avalokite^vara,  and  says  :  "  What 
is  the  reason  there,  O  Bhagavat,  what  is  the  cause, 
that  thou  smilest,  O  lord  of  the  world  ? 

14.  '"Explain  this,  for  thou  knowest  the  sense, 
and  art  full  of  kind  compassion,  the  deliverer  of 
many  living  beings.  All  beings  will  be  filled  with 
joyful  thoughts,  when  they  have  thus  heard  this 
excellent  and  delightful  speech. 

15.  '"And  the  Bodhisattvas  who  have  come  from 


'  Maitra,  'love,'  possibly  'kindness,'  or  was  it  kshetra? 
'  Amiid   asydbhd? 


§  32.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS,  49 

many  worlds  to  Sukhavati  in  order  to  see  the 
Buddha,  having  heard  it  and  having  perceived  the 
great  joy,  will  quickly  inspect  this  country. 

1 6.  '"And  beings,  come  to  this  noble  country, 
(quickly)  obtain  miraculous  power,  divine  eye  and 
divine  ear,  they  remember  their  former  births,  and 
know  the  highest  wisdom." 

17.  'Then  Buddha  Amitayu  preaches:  "This 
prayer  was  mine  formerly,  so  that  beings  having  in 
any  way  whatever  heard  my  name  should  for  ever 
go  to  my  country. 

18.  '"And  this  my  excellent  prayer  has  been 
fulfilled,  and  beings  having  quickly  come  here  from 
many  worlds  into  my  presence,  never  return  from 
here,  not  even  for  one  birth." 

19.  '  If  a  Bodhisattva  wishes  here  that  his  country 
should  be  such  as  this,  and  that  he  also  should 
deliver  many  beings,  through  his  name,  through 
his  preaching,  and  through  his  sight, 

20.  '  Let  him  quickly  and  with  speed  go  to  the 
world  Sukhavati,  and  having  gone  near  Amita- 
prabha,  let  him  worship  a  thousand  ko/is  of 
Buddhas. 

21.  '  Having  worshipped  many  ko/is  of  Buddhas, 
and  having  gone  to  many  countries  by  means  of 
their  miraculous  power,  and  having  performed  ador- 
ation in  the  presence  of  the  Sugatas,  they  will  go 
to  Sukhavati  with  devotion  \ 

J  32.  'And  again,  O  Ananda,  there  is  a  Bodhi- 
tree  belonging  to  Amitayus,  the  Tathagata,  holy 
and  fully  enlightened.     That  Bodhi-tree  is  ten  hun- 


^  The  Tibetan  translation  has  '  in  the  morning,'  as  if  the  text 
had  been  purvabhakta. 

[49]  *  E 


50  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAtI,  §33. 

dred  yq^anas  in  height,  having  petals,  leaves,  and 
branches  spread  over  eight  hundred  yo^anas,  having 
a  circumference  near  the  base  of  the  root  of  five 
hundred  yo^ranas,  always  in  leaf,  always  in  flower, 
always  in  fruit,  of  different  colours,  of  many  hundred 
thousand  colours,  of  different  leaves,  of  different 
flowers,  of  different  fruits,  adorned  with  many  beau- 
tiful ornaments,  shining  with  precious  jewels,  bright 
like  the  moon,  beautified  with  precious  jewels  (such 
as  are)  fastened  on  ^'akra's  head,  strewn  with  Alnta- 
ma;/i  ^  jewels,  well  adorned  with  the  best  jewels 
of  the  sea,  more  than  heavenly,  hung  with  golden 
strings,  adorned  with  hundreds  of  gold  chains,  jewel- 
garlands,  necklaces,  bracelets,  strings  of  red  pearls 
and  blue  pearls,  lion  twists  (Siwhalata),  girdles, 
bunches,  strings  of  jewels,  and  all  kinds  of  jewels, 
covered  with  nets  of  bells,  nets  of  all  kinds  of  jewels, 
nets  of  pearls,  and  nets  of  gold,  adorned  with  the 
emblems  of  the  dolphin,  the  Svastika,  the  Nandya- 
varta,  and  the  moon,  adorned  with  nets  of  jewels 
and  of  bells,  and  with  ornaments  of  gold  and  of 
all  kinds  of  jewels,  in  fact  adorned  according  to  the 
desires  of  beings  whatever  their  wishes  may  be. 

'And  a<rain,  O  Ananda,  the  sound  and  noise  of 
that  Bodhi-tree,  when  it  is  moved  by  the  wind, 
reaches  immeasurable  worlds.  And,  O  Ananda,  for 
those  beings  whose  hearing  that  Bodhi-tree  reaches, 
no  disease  of  the  ear  is  to  be  feared  until  they  reach 
Bodhi  (highest  knowledge).  And  for  those  immea- 
surable, innumerable,  inconceivable,  incomparable, 
measureless,  immense, and  inexpressible  beings, whose 
sight  that  Bodhi-tree  reaches,  no  disease  of  the  eye 

'  Jewels  yielding  every  wish. 


§33.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  5 1 

is  to  be  feared  until  they  reach  Bodhi.  And  again, 
O  Ananda,  for  those  beings  who  smell  the  scent  of 
that  Bodhi-tree,  no  disease  of  the  nose  is  to  be 
feared  until  they  reach  Bodhi.  For  those  beings 
who  taste  the  fruits  of  that  Bodhi-tree,  no  disease 
of  the  tongue  is  to  be  feared  until  they  reach  Bodhi. 
For  those  beings  who  are  lighted  up  by  the  light 
of  that  Bodhi-tree,  no  disease  of  the  body  is  to 
be  feared  until  they  reach  Bodhi.  And  again, 
O  Ananda,  for  those  beings  who  meditate  on  that 
Bodhi-tree  according  to  the  Law,  henceforward  until 
they  reach  the  Bodhi,  no  perplexity  of  their  thought 
is  to  be  feared.  And  all  those  beings,  through  the 
seeing  of  that  Bodhi-tree,  never  turn  away,  namely, 
from  the  highest  perfect  knowledge.  And  they  obtain 
three  kinds  of  kshanti  or  resignation,  namely,  Ghosha- 
nuga,  Anulomikt  (resignation  to  natural  conse- 
quences), and  Anutpattika-dharma-kshanti  (resigna- 
tion to  consequences  which  have  not  yet  arisen), 
through  the  power  of  the  former  prayers  of  that 
same  Tathagata  Amitayus,  through  the  service 
rendered  by  them  to  the  former  6^inas,  and  through 
the  performance  of  the  former  prayers,  to  be  well 
accomplished,  and  to  be  well  conceived,  without 
failure  or  without  flaw. 

§  33.  '  And  again,  O  Ananda,  those  Bodhisattvas 
who  have  been  born,  are  being  born,  or  will  be  born 
there,  are  all  bound  to  one  birth  only  \  and  will 
thence  indeed  obtain  the  highest  perfect  knowledge  ; 
barring  always  the  power  of  prayers,  as  in  the  case 
of  those  Bodhisattvas  who  are  preaching  with  the 
voice  of  lions,  who  are  girded  with  the  noble  armour 

^  Their  present  birth. 
*E  2 


52  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKhAvAt!,  §34. 

(of  the  Law),  and  \vho  are  devoted  to  the  work  of 
helping  all  people  to  attain  Parinirvdwa. 

§  34.  '  And  again,  O  Ananda,  in  that  Buddha 
country,  those  who  are  6'ravakas  are  possessed  of 
the  li^dit  of  a  fathom,  and  those  who  are  Bodhisattvas 
are  possessed  of  the  light  of  a  hundred  thousand 
ko/is  of  )o^anas  ;  barring  always  the  two  Bodhi- 
sattvas, by  whose  light  that  w^orld  is  everywhere 
shining  with  eternal  splendour.' 

Then  the  blessed  Ananda  said  this  to  the  Bhagavat: 
'  What  are  the  names,  O  Bhagavat,  of  those  two 
noble-minded  Bodhisattvas  ? ' 

The  Bhagavat  said  :  *  One  of  them,  O  Ananda,  is 
the  noble-minded  Bodhisattva  Avalokite^vara,  and 
the  second  is  Mahasthamaprapta  by  name.  And, 
O  Ananda,  these  two  were  born  there,  having  left 
this  Buddha  country  here  \ 

§  35.  '  And,  O  Ananda,  those  Bodhisattvas  who 
have  been  born  in  that  Buddha  country  are  all 
endowed  with  the  thirty-two  marks  of  a  great  man, 
possessed  of  perfect  members,  skilled  in  meditation 
and  wisdom,  clever  in  all  kinds  of  wisdom,  having 
sharp  organs,  having  well-restrained  organs,  having 
organs  of  sense  capable  of  thorough  knowledge,  not 
mean,  possessed  of  the  five  kinds  of  strength,  of 
patience  under  censure,  and  of  endless  and  bound- 
less good  qualities. 

*  Sahghavarman  translates  this  passage  :  *  These  two  Bodhi- 
sattvas practised  the  discij)line  of  Bodhisattva  in  this  country,  and 
after  death  they  were  miraculously  born  in  that  Buddha  country.' 
Bodhiru/i  translates :  '  O  Ananda,  these  two  Bodhisattvas  went  to 
be  born  in  that  country  from  the  world  Sahd,  when  they  had 
exhausted  the  measure  of  their  life  (here).'  The  world  Saha  belongs 
to  the  Buddha  ^dkyamuni. 


§37-  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  53 

§  36.  '  And  again,  O  Ananda,  all  those  Bodhi- 
sattvas  who  have  been  born  in  that  Buddha  country 
are  not  deprived  of  the  sight  of  Buddha,  nor  liable 
to  fall  down  (to  the  evil  states),  until  they  reach  the 
Bodhi.  Henceforward  they  all  will  never  be  forget- 
ful of  their  former  births  ^ ;  barring  always  those  who 
are  devoted  to  their  former  place,  during  the  dis- 
turbances of  the  kalpas,  and  while  the  five  kinds 
of  corruption  prevail,  when  there  is  the  appearance 
of  blessed  Buddhas  in  the  world,  as  for  instance, 
that  of  me  at  present. 

§  37.  'And  again,  O  Ananda,  all  the  Bodhisattvas  • 
who  have  been  born  in  that  Buddha  country,  having 
gone  during  one  morning  meal  to  the  other  world, 
worship  many  hundred  thousand  niyutas  of  ko/is  of 
Buddhas,  as  many  as  they  like,  through  the  favour 
of  Buddha.  They  consider  in  many  ways  that  they 
should  worship  (Buddhas)  with  such  and  such  flowers, 
incense,  lamps,  scents,  garlands,  ointments,  powder, 
cloaks,  umbrellas,  flags,  banners,  ensigns,  music,  con- 
certs, and  musical  instruments;  and,  as  soon  as  they 
have  considered  this,  there  arise  also  on  their  hands 
exactly  such  materials  for  every  kind  of  worship. 
And  while  performing  worship  for  those  blessed 
Buddhas  with  those  materials,  beginning  with  flowers 
and  ending  with  musical  instruments,  they  lay  up  for 
themselves  much  immeasurable  and  innumerable 
merit.  Again,  if  they  wish  that  such  handfulls  of 
flowers  should  be  produced  on  their  hands,  then 
such  handfulls  of  heavenly  flowers,  of  different  colours, 
of  many  colours,  of  different  scents,  are  produced  on 
their  hands  as  soon  as  thought  of.     They  shower 


Na'  must  be  left  out,  or  we  must  read  na^atva^atismara. 


54  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKIlAVAXt,  §38. 

again  and  again  such  handfulls  of  flowers  upon  those 
blessed  Buddhas.     And  the  very  smallest  handfull 
of  flowers,  being  thrown  on  high,  appears  above  in 
the  sky  as  an  umbrella  of  flowers  ten  yo^^anas  in 
circumference.      And   when    the   second    has    been 
thrown  after  it,  the  first  does  not  fall  down  on  the 
earth.     There  are  handfulls  of  flowers  there,  which 
having  been  thrown  up,  appear  in  the  sky  as  um- 
brellas of  flowers  twenty  yoj^anas  in  circumference. 
There    appear   in    the   sky   some    flower-umbrellas, 
thirty,  forty,   or  fifty  yo^anas  in  circumference,   as 
far  as  a  hundred  thousand  yo^anas  in  circumference. 
Those  (Bodhisattvas)  there  who  perceive  the  noble 
pleasure  and  joy,  and  obtain  the  noble  strength  of 
thought,   having  caused  a  great  and  immeasurable 
and  innumerable  stock  of  good  works  to  ripen,  and 
having  worshipped  many  hundred  thousand  niyutas 
of  ko/is  of  Buddhas,  turn  again  to  the  world  Sukha- 
vati  in  one  morning,  through  the  favour  of  practising 
the  former  prayers  of  the  same  Tath^gata  Amitayus, 
owing  to  the  hearing  of  the  Law  formerly  given,  owing 
to  the  stock  of  good  works  produced  under  former 
6rinas,  owing  to  the  perfect  completion  in  the  success 
of  former  prayers,  owing  to  the  well-ordered  state 
of  mind  \ 

§  38.  '  And  again,  O  Ananda,  all  those  beings 
who  have  been  born  in  that  Buddha  country  recite 
the  story  of  the  Law,  which  is  accompanied  by  omni- 
science ^      And    for   the    beings    in    that    Buddha 

'  The  text  of  lliis  passage  is  very  imperfect  in  all  the  MSS. 
Comparing  the  sentence  with  the  last  sentence  of  Chapter  XXXII, 
it  might  seem  possible  to  read  paripfirwanQnatayA,  or  paripQr- 
yatayfinOnataya,  for  paripGryatmabhiitaya.  On  suvibhakta, 
8C«  Childcrs,  s.  v.  vibha^^'ati. 

•  Sec  the  twenty-third  Pra/zidhana. 


§3^.  THE   LAND    OF    BLISS.  55 

country  there  exists  no  idea  of  property  whatever  '. 
And  all  those  going-  and  walking  through  that 
Buddha  country  feel  neither  pleasure  nor  pain ; 
stepping  forward  they  have  no  desire,  and  with 
desire  they  do  not  step  forward.  They  give  no 
thought  to  any  beings.  And  again,  O  Ananda,  for 
those  beings  who  have  been  born  in  that  world 
Sukhavati,  there  is  no  idea  of  others,  no  idea  of 
self,  no  idea  of  inequality,  no  strife,  no  dispute,  no 
opposition.  Full  of  equanimity,  of  benevolent 
thought,  of  tender  thought,  of  affectionate  thought, 
of  useful  thought,  of  serene  thought,  of  firm  thought, 
of  unbiassed  thought,  of  undisturbed  thought,  of 
unagitated  thought,  of  thought  (fixed  on)  the 
practice  of  discipline  and  transcendent  wisdom, 
having  entered  on  knowledge  which  is  a  firm  sup- 
port to  all  thoughts,  equal  to  the  ocean  in  wisdom, 
equal  to  the  mountain  Meru  in  knowledge,  rich  in 
many  good  qualities,  delighting  in  the  music  of  the 
Bodhyaiigas  2,  devoted  to  the  music  of  Buddha, 
they  discard  the  eye  of  flesh,  and  assume  the 
heavenly  eye.  And  having  approached  the  eye  of 
wisdom,  having  reached  the  eye  of  the  Law,  pro- 
ducing the  eye  of  Buddha,  showing  it,  lighting  it, 
and  fully  exhibiting  it,  they  attain  perfect  wisdom. 
And  being  bent  on  the  equilibrium  of  the  three  ele- 
ments ^  having  subdued  and  calmed  their  thoughts, 
endowed  with    a   perception    of  the    causes  of  all 


'  See  the  tenth  Pra«idhana. 

*  '  Requisites  for  attaining  the  supreme  knowledge  of  a  Buddha.' — 
Childers,  Pali  Dictionary,  p.  93  b. 

'  Probably  the  three  dhatus,  Kamadhatu,  RQpadhatu,  and 
Arfipadhatu  ;  see  Childers,  s.  v.  dhatu. 


56  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAt!,  §  3R. 

things,  clever  in  explanation  of  causes,  endowed  with 
tlie  power  of  explaining  the  Law  (or  things  such 
as  ihey  really  are),  clever  in  taking  and  refusing, 
clever  in  leading  and  not  leading,  clever  in  resting  S 
they,  being  regardless  of  worldly  stories,  derive 
true  pleasures  from  stories  transcending  the  world. 
They  are  clever  in  examining  all  things,  familiar 
with  the  knowledge  of  the  cessation  of  the  working 
of  all  things,  perceiving  even  what  cannot  be  seen, 
caring  for  nothing,  attached  to  nothing,  without 
cares,  without  pain,  free  without  clinging  to  any- 
thing, free  from  impurity  -,  of  blameless  behaviour, 
not  clinging  to  anything,  intent  on  the  deep  or 
profound  laws,  they  do  not  sink,  elevated  to  the 
entrance  into  the  knowledge  of  Buddha  difficult 
to  comprehend,  having  obtained  the  path  of  one 
vehicle  ^,  free  from  doubt,  beyond  the  reach  of 
questionings,  knowing  the  thoughts  of  others,  free 
from  self-confidence.  Beino-  elevated  in  knowledcre, 
they  are  like  the  Sumeru  ;  being  imperturbable  in 
thought,  they  are  like  the  ocean;  they  surpass  the 
light  of  the  sun  and  moon,  by  the  light  of  wisdom, 
and  by  the  whiteness,  brilliancy,  purity,  and  beauty 
of  their  knowledge ;  by  their  light  and  splendour, 
they  are  like  the  colour  of  molten  gold  ;  by  their 
patiently  bearing  the  good  and  evil  deeds  of  all 
beings,  they  are  like  the  earth  ;  by  their  cleaning 
and   carrying  off  the  taint  *   of  all   sins,  they  are 

'  The  text  may  originally  have  been  sthanasthanakujalaA. 

•  The  next  words  aparyasth'xyina^  and  abhi.c«asvam{ila- 
sthSyina/;  seem  to  have  a  technical  meaning,  but  neither  the 
Tibetan  nor  the  Chinese  translators  give  an  intelligible  rendering. 

'  Sahghavarman  translates  '  one  vehicle.' 

*  The  Tibetan  translation  presupposes  mala  instead  of  mQla. 


§3^.  THE    LAND    OF   BLISS.  57 

like  water ;  by  their  burning  the  evil  of  pride  ^  in 
anything,  they  are  like  the  king  of  fire  ;  by  not 
clinging  to  anything,  they  are  like  the  wind  ;  by  per- 
vading all  things  and  yet  not  caring  for  anything, 
they  are  like  the  ether ;  by  not  being  tainted  by  the 
whole  world,  they  are  like  lotuses ;  by  their  shout- 
ing forth  the  Law,  they  are  like  the  great  cloud  at 
the  rainy  season  ;  by  showering  down  the  whole 
ocean  of  the  Law,  they  are  like  the  great  rain  ;  by 
overpowering  great  troops,  they  are  like  bulls ;  by 
the  highest  restraint  of  their  thoughts,  they  are  like 
great  elephants  ;  by  being  well  trained,  they  are  like 
noble  horses ;  by  their  fearlessness,  confidence,  and 
heroism,  they  are  like  the  lion,  the  king  of  beasts  ; 
by  affording  protection  to  all  beings,  they  are  like 
the  Nyagrodha  (fig-tree),  the  king  of  trees ;  by  not 
being  shaken  by  any  calumniators,  they  are  like  the 
(Sumeru),  the  king  of  mountains  ;  by  their  feeling  of 
unlimited  love,  they  are  like  the  sky ;  by  their  pre- 
cedence, owing  to  their  command  of  the  Law,  and 
their  stock  of  all  merit,  they  are  like  the  great 
Brahman ;  by  their  not  dwelling  in  what  they  have 
accumulated,  they  are  like  birds  ;  by  their  scattering 
all  calumniators,  they  are  like  Garu^a,  king  of  birds  ; 
by  their  not  being  averse  to  our  obtaining  difficult 
things,  they  are  like  the  Udumbara  flowers;  calm 
like  elephants  ^,  because  their  senses  are  neither 
crooked  nor  shaken  ;  clever  in  decision,  full  of  the 
sweet  flavour  of  patience ;  without  envy,  because 
they  do  not  hanker  after  the  happiness  of  others ; 
wise,  because  in  their  search  after  the  Law,  never 

^  Man  a,  '  pride,'  is  one  of  the  Klcjas. 

'  The  Tibetan  translator  seems  to  have  read  sagaravat,  instead 
ofnagavat. 


58  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAtJ,  §  3S. 

tired  of  discussions  on  the  Law ;  like  the  precious 
beryl,  through  their  value  ;  (like)  jewel-mines  \  by 
their  sacred  knowledge ;  sweet-sounding  by  the 
noise  of  the  great  drum  of  the  Law,  striking  the 
great  kettledrum  of  the  Law,  blowing  the  great 
trumpet-shell  of  the  Law,  raising  the  great  banner 
of  the  Law,  lighting  the  torch  of  the  Law,  looking 
for  wisdom,  not  foolish,  faultless,  passionless,  pure, 
refined,  not  greedy,  fond  of  distributing,  generous, 
open-handed,  fond  of  distributing  gifts,  not  stingy 
in  giving  instruction  and  food,  not  attached,  without 
fear,  without  desires,  wise,  patient,  energetic,  bash- 
ful, orderly,  fearless  -,  full  of  knowledge,  happy, 
pleasant  to  live  with,  obliging,  enlightening  the 
world  ^,  free  from  sorrow,  free  from  taint,  having 
left  off  the  winking  of  the  eye,  possessing  lightly 
acquired  knowledge,  strong  in  reasoning,  strong 
in  prayer,  not  crooked,  not  perverse ;  then,  hav- 
ing accumulated  a  hundred  thousand  niyutas  of 
ko/is  of  lakshas  *  of  virtue,  delivered  from  the 
thorns  of  pride,  free  from  illusion,  hatred,  and 
jjassion ;  pure,  devoted  to  what  is  pure,  famous 
by  the  CTina-power,  learned  in  the  world,  elevated 
by  their  purified  knowledge,  sons  of  the  G'lna, 
endowed  with  the  vigour  of  thought,  heroes,  firm, 
unselfish  ^  free  from  faults,  unequalled,  free  from 
anger,  collected,  noble,  heroes,  bashful,  energetic, 
possessed  of  memory,  understanding,  and  prudence  ; 

*  The  Tibetan  translation  seems  to  have  read   ratnakarasa- 
d  risA/i. 

*  If  ihc  same  as  nirgahana. 

'  The  next  words  are  unintelligible  in  their  present  form. 

*  The  Tibetan  translation  has  Buddha  for  laksha. 

*  AsamTi/;  in  the  Tibetan  translation. 


§39-  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  59 

sending  forth  the  weapons  of  knowledge,  possessed 
of  purity,  shining,  free  from  faults  and  taints,  en- 
dowed with  memory,  resting  on  serene  knowledge. 
And  such,  O  Ananda,  are  the  beings  in  that  Buddha 
country,  stated  briefly.  But  if  the  Tathagatas 
should  describe  them  fully,  even  in  a  length  of  life 
that  should  last  for  a  hundred  thousand  niyutas  of 
ko/is  of  kalpas,  yet  the  end  of  the  virtues  of  those 
good  people  would  not  be  reached,  and  yet  there 
would  be  no  failure  of  the  self-confidence  of  the 
Tathagata,  And  why  ?  Because,  O  Ananda,  both 
are  indeed  inconceivable  and  incomparable,  viz.  first, 
the  virtues  of  those  Bodhisattvas,  and  secondly,  the 
unsurpassed  light  of  knowledge  of  the  Tathagata  ^ 

§  39.  '  And  now,  O  Ananda,  stand  up,  facing 
westward,  and  having  taken  a  handful  of  flowers, 
fall  down.  This  is  the  quarter  where  that  Bhagavat 
Amitabha,  the  Tathagata,  holy  and  fully  enlightened, 
dwells,  remains,  supports  himself,  and  teaches  the 
Law,  whose  spotless  and  pure  name,  famed  in 
every  quarter  of  the  whole  world  with  its  ten 
quarters,  the  blessed  Buddhas,  equal  to  (the  grains 
of)  the  sand  of  the  river  Ganga,  speaking  and 
answering  again  and  again  without  stopping,  extol, 
praise,  and  eulogize.' 

After  this,  the  blessed  Ananda  said  this  to  the 
Bhagavat :  '  I  wish,  O  Bhagavat,  to  see  that  Ami- 
tabha, Amitaprabha,  Amitayus,  the  Tathagata, 
holy  and  fully  enlightened,  and  those  noble-minded 
Bodhisattvas,  who  are  possessed  of  a  stock  of  merit 
amassed  under  many  hundred  thousand  niyutas  of 
ko/is  of  Buddhas.' 

•■  For  these  passages,  see  the  end  of  Chapter  XII. 


6o  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAtJ,  §39. 

At  that  moment  this  speech  was  spoken  by  the 
blessed  Ananda,  and  immediately  that  Amitabha,  the 
Tathdgata,  holy  and  fully  enlightened,  let  such  a  ray  of 
light  go  out  of  the  palm  of  his  own  hand,  that  even 
the  most  distant  Buddha  country  was  shining  with  the 
great  splendour.  And  again  at  that  time,  whatever 
black  mountains,  or  jewel-mountains,  or  Merus, 
great  Merus,  Mu/ilindas,  great  INIu/C'iiindas,  A'akra- 
vd^as,  great  A'^akrava^as,  or  erections,  or  pillars, 
trees,  woods,  gardens,  palaces,  belonging  to  the  gods 
and  men,  exist  everywhere  in  hundred  thousand 
ko/is  of  Buddha  countries  ;  all  these  were  pervaded 
and  overcome  by  the  light  of  that  Tathagata.  And  as 
a  man,  followed  by  another  at  a  distance  of  a  fathom 
only,  would  see  the  other  man,  when  the  sun  has 
risen,  exactly  in  the  same  manner  the  Bhikshus, 
Bhikshu;ns,  Upasakas  (laymen),  Upasikas  (lay- 
women),  gods,  Nagas,  Yakshas,  Rakshasas,  Gan- 
dharvas,  Asuras,  Garu^as,  Kinnaras,  I\Iahoragas,men 
and  not-men,  in  this  Buddha  country,  saw  at  that 
time  that  Amitabha,  the  Tathagata,  holy  and  fully 
enlightened,  like  the  Sumeru,  the  king  of  mountains, 
elevated  above  all  countries,  surpassing  all  quarters, 
shining,  warming,  glittering,  blazing;  and  they  saw 
that  great  mass  of  Bodhisattvas,  and  that  company 
of  Bhikshus,  viz.  by  the  grace  of  Buddha,  from  the 
purencss  of  that  light.  And  as  this  great  earth 
might  be,  when  all  covered  with  water,  so  that  no 
trees,  no  mountains,  no  islands,  no  grasses,  bushes, 
herbs,  large  trees,  no  rivers,  chasms,  water-falls, 
W'ould  be  seen,  but  onl)-  the  one  great  earth  which 
had  all  become  an  ocean,  in  exactly  the  same 
manner  there  is  neither  mark  nor  sign  whatever  to 
be  seen  in  that  Buddha  country,  except  6'ravakas, 


§40.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  6 1 

spreading  their  light  over  a  fathom,  and  those 
Bodhisattvas,  spreading  their  Hght  over  a  hundred 
thousand  ko/is  of  yq^anas.  And  that  Bhagavat 
Amitabha,  the  Tathagata,  holy  and  fully  en- 
lightened, overshadowing  that  mass  of  6'ravakas 
and  that  mass  of  Bodhisattvas,  is  seen,  illumina- 
ting all  quarters.  Again  at  that  time  all  those 
Bodhisattvas,  .S'ravakas,  gods  and  men  in  that  world 
Sukhavatt,  saw  this  world  Saha  and  ^'akyamuni,  the 
Tathagata,  holy  and  fully  enlightened,  surrounded 
by  a  holy  company  of  Bhikshus,  teaching  the  Law. 

§  40.  Then,  the  Bhagavat  addressed  the  noble- 
minded  Bodhisattva  A^ita,  and  said :  '  Do  you 
see,  O  A^ita,  the  perfection  of  the  array  of  orna- 
ments and  good  qualities  in  that  Buddha  country  ; 
and  above  in  the  sky  (places)  with  charming  parks  \ 
charming  gardens,  charming  rivers  and  lotus  lakes, 
scattered  with  many  precious  Padmas,  Utpalas, 
Kumudas,  and  Pu;^^arikas ;  and  below,  from  the 
earth  to  the  abode  of  the  Akanish//^as,  the  surface 
of  the  sky,  covered  with  flowers,  ornamented  with 
wreaths  of  flowers,  shining  on  the  rows  of  many 
precious  columns,  frequented  by  flocks  of  all  kinds 
of  birds  created  by  the  Tathagata  ? ' 

The  Bodhisattva  A^ita  said  :  '  I  see,  O  Bhagavat.' 

The  Bhagavat  said  :  *  Do  you  see  again,  O  A^^ita, 
those  flocks  of  immortal  birds,  making  the  whole 
Buddha  country  resound  with  the  voice  of  Buddha, 
so  that  those  Bodhisattvas  are  never  without 
meditating  on  Buddha  ?  ' 

A^ita  said :  ^  I  see,  O  Bhagavat.' 

^  A  substantive  seems  to  be  wanting  to  which  all  these  adjectives 
would  refer. 


62  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAT?,  §41. 

The  Bhagavat  said  :  '  Do  you  see  again,  O  Afita, 
those  beings,  who  have  ascended  to  the  palaces 
which  extend  over  a  hundred  thousand  yo^anas  in 
the  sky,  walking  about  respectfully  ?  ' 

Af^ita  said:  '  I  see,  O  Bhagavat.' 

The  Bhagavat  said:  'What  do  you  think,  O  A^nta, 
is  there  any  difference  between  the  gods  called 
Paranirmitavajavartins,  and  men  in  the  world 
Sukhavati  ? ' 

A^^ita  said :  T  do  not,  O  Bhagavat,  perceive  even 
one  difference,  so  far  as  the  men  in  that  world  of 
Sukhavati  are  endowed  with  great  supernatural 
powers.' 

The  Bhagavat  said:  'Do  you  see  again,  O  A^ita, 
those  men  dwelling  within  the  calyx  of  excellent 
lotus-flowers  in  that  world  Sukhavati  ? ' 

He  said:  'As  gods  called  Trayastriw^as  or  Yamas, 
having  entered  into  palaces  of  fifty  or  hundred  or 
five  hundred  yo^anas  in  extent,  are  playing,  sporting, 
walking  about,  exactly  in  the  same  manner  I  see, 
O  Bhagavat,  these  men  dwelling  within  the  calyx  of 
excellent  lotus-flowers  in  the  world  Sukhavati. 

§  41.  '  Again  there  are,  O  Bhagavat,  beings  who, 
being  born  miraculously,  appear  sitting  cross-legged 
in  the  lotus-flowers.  What  is  there,  O  Bhagavat, 
the  cause,  what  the  reason,  that  some  dwell  within 
the  calyx,  while  others,  being  born  miraculously, 
appear  sitting  cross-legged  in  the  lotus-flowers  ? ' 

The  Bhagavat  said :  '  Those  Bodhisattvas,  O 
A^ita,  who,  living  in  other  Buddha  countries,  entertain 
doubt  about  being  born  in  the  world  Sukhavati,  and 
with  that  thought  amass  a  stock  of  merit,  for  them 
there  is  the  dwelling  within  the  calyx.  Those,  on 
the   contrary,   wlio  arc   filled  with   failh,  and  being 


§  4f-  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  63 

free  from  doubt,  amass  a  stock  of  merit  in  order  to 
be  born  in  the  world  Sukhavati,  and  conceive,  believe, 
and  trust  in  the  perfect  knowledge  of  the  blessed 
Buddhas,  they,  being  born  miraculously,  appear 
sitting  cross-legged  in  the  flowers  of  the  lotus.  And 
those  noble-minded  Bodhisattvas,  O  A^ita,  who, 
living  in  other  Buddha  countries,  raise  their  thought 
in  order  to  see  Amitabha,  the  Tathagata,  holy  and 
fully  enlightened,  who  never  entertain  a  doubt, 
believe  in  the  perfect  knowledge  of  Buddha  and 
in  their  own  stock  of  merit,  for  them,  being  born 
miraculously,  and  appearing  cross-legged,  there  is, 
in  one  minute,  such  a  body  as  that  of  other  beings 
who  have  been  born  there  long  before.  See,  O 
A^ita,  the  excellent,  immeasurable,  unfailing,  un- 
limited wisdom,  that  namely  for  their  own  benefit 
they  are  deprived  during  five  hundred  years  of 
seeing  Buddhas,  seeing  Bodhisattvas,  hearing  the 
Law,  speaking  about  the  Law  (with  others),  and  thus 
collecting  a  stock  of  merit ;  they  are  indeed  deprived 
of  the  successful  attainment  of  every  stock  of  merit, 
and  that  through  their  forming  ideas  tainted  with 
doubt. 

'And,  O  A^ita,  there  might  be  a  dungeon  belong- 
ing to  an  anointed  Kshatriya  king,  inlaid  entirely 
with  gold  and  beryl,  in  which  cushions,  garlands, 
wreaths  and  strings  are  fixed,  having  canopies  of 
different  colours  and  kind,  covered  with  silk  cushions, 
scattered  over  with  various  flowers  and  blossoms, 
scented  with  excellent  scents,  adorned  with  arches, 
courts,  windows,  pinnacles,  fire-places,  and  terraces, 
covered  with  nets  of  bells  of  the  seven  kinds  of 
gems,  having  four  angles,  four  pillars,  four  doors, 
four  stairs ;   and  the  son  of  that  king  having  been 


64  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAtJ,  §41. 

thrown  into  the  dungeon  for  some  misdeed  is  there, 
bound  with  a  chain  made  of  the  6"dmbClnada  gold. 
And  suppose  there  is  a  couch  prepared  for  him, 
covered  with  many  woollen  cloths,  spread  over  with 
cotton  and  feather  cushions,  having  Kaliiiga  cover- 
ings, and  carpets,  together  with  coverlids  \  red  on 
both  sides,  beautiful  and  charming.  There  he  might 
be  then  either  sitting  or  resting.  And  there  might 
be  brought  to  him  much  food  and  drink,  of  various 
kinds,  pure  and  well  prepared.  What  do  you  think, 
O  A^ita,  would  the  enjoyment  be  great  for  that' 
prince  ? ' 

A^ita  said:  '  Yes^,  it  would  be  great,  O  Bhagavat.* 

The  Bhagavat  said :  '  What  do  you  think,  O 
A^ita,  would  he  even  taste  it  there,  and  notice  it, 
or  would  he  feel  any  satisfaction  from  it  ? ' 

He  said  :  '  Not  indeed,  O  Bhagavat;  but  on  the 
contrary,  when  he  had  been  led  away  by  the  king 
and  thrown  into  the  dungeon,  he  would  only  wish 
for  deliverance  from  there.  He  would  seek  for  the 
nobles,  princes,  ministers,  women  ^  elders  (rich 
merchants),  householders,  and  lords  of  castles,  who 
might  deliver  him  from  that  dungeon.  Moreover, 
O  Bhagavat,  there  is  no  pleasure  for  that  prince  in 
that  dungeon,  nor  is  he  liberated,  until  the  king 
shows  him  favour.' 

The  Bhagavat  said  :  '  Thus,  O  Acita,  it  is  with 
those  Bodhisattvas  who,  having  fallen  into  doubt, 
amass  a  stock  of  merit,  but  doubt  the  knowledge 
of  Buddha.     They  are  born  in  that  world  Sukha- 

*  The  text  is  corrupt.  One  might  begin  a  new  word  with 
sottarapada^^^ada^. 

•  One  expects,  No. 

'  Stryagara,  like  the  German  Fraucnzimmer. 


§42-  THE   LAND   OF   BLISS.  65 

vati,  through  the  hearing  of  Buddha's  name,  and 
through  the  serenity  of  thought  only ;  they  do 
not,  however,  appear  sitting  cross-legged  in  the 
flowers  of  the  lotus,  being  born  miraculously, 
but  dwell  only  in  the  calyx  of  the  lotus-flowers. 
Moreover  for  them  there  exist  ideas  of  palaces  and 
gardens  \  There  is  no  discharge,  there  is  no  phlegm 
or  mucus,  there  is  nothing  disagreeable  to  the  mind. 
But  they  are  deprived  of  seeing  Buddhas,  hearing 
the  Law,  seeing  Bodhisattvas,  speaking  about  and 
ascertaining  the  Law,  (gathering)  any  (new)  stock  of 
merit,  and  practising  the  Law,  during  five  hundred 
years.  Moreover  they  do  not  rejoice  there  or  per- 
ceive satisfaction.  But  they  wish  to  remove  one 
another,  and  then  they  step  out  behind.  And  it  is 
not  known  whether  their  exit  takes  place  above, 
below,  or  across.  See,  O  A^ita,  there  might  be 
worshippings  of  many  hundred  thousand  niyutas 
of  ko^'is  of  Buddhas  during  those  five  hundred 
years,  and  also  many,  immense,  innumerable,  im- 
measurable stocks  of  merit  to  be  amassed.  But 
all  this  they  destroy  by  the  fault  of  doubt.  See, 
O  A^ita,  to  how  great  an  injury  the  doubt  of  the 
Bodhisattvas  leads.  Therefore  now,  O  A^ita,  after 
the  Bodhisattvas  without  doubting  have  quickly 
raised  their  thoughts  towards  the  Bodhi,  in  order 
to  obtain  power  of  conferring  happiness  for  the 
benefit  of  all  creatures,  their  stock  of  merit  should 
be  turned  towards  their  being  born  in  the  world 
Sukhavati,  where  the  blessed  Amitabha,  the  Tatha- 
gata,  holy  and  fully  enlightened,  dwells.' 

§  42.  After  these  words,   the  Bodhisattva  A^ita 

^  They  imagine  they  are  hving  in  palaces  and  gardens. 
[49]  ''•'^' 


66  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAtJ,  §  42. 

thus  spoke  to  the  Bhagavat :  '  O  Bhagavat,  \\'\\\  the 
Bodhisattvas,\vho  have  gone  away  from  this  Buddha 
country,  or  from  the  side  of  other  blessed  Buddhas, 
be  born  in  the  world  Sukhavati  ?  ' 

The  Bhagavat  said:  'Indeed,  O  A^ita,  seventy- 
two  niyutas  of  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas  are  gone  away 
from  this  Buddha  country,  who  will  be  born  in  the 
world  Sukhavati  ;  Bodhisattvas,  who  will  never 
return,  thanks  to  the  stock  of  merit,  which  they 
have  accumulated  under  many  hundred  thousand 
niyutas  of  ko/is  of  Buddhas.  What  then  shall 
be  said  of  those  with  smaller  stocks  of  merit '  ? 
I.  Eighteen  hundred  niyutas  of  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas 
will  be  born  in  the  world  Sukhavati  from  the  place 
of  the  Tathagata  Dushprasaha.  2.  There  lives  in 
the  Eastern  quarter  the  Tathagata  named  Ratnakara. 
From  his  place  ninety  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas  will  be 
Ijorn  in  the  world  Sukhavati.  3.  Twenty-two  ko/is 
of  Bodhisattvas  will  be  born  in  the  world  Sukhavati 
from  the  place  of  the  Tathagata  Cyotishprabha. 
4.  Twenty-five  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas  will  be  born  in 
the  world  Sukhavati  from  the  place  of  the  Tatha- 
gata Amitaprabha.  5.  Sixty  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas 
will  be  born  in  the  world  Sukhivati  from  the  place 
of  the  Tathagata  Lokapradipa.  6.  Sixty-four  ko/is 
of  Bodhisattvas  will  be  born  in  the  world  Sukha- 
vati from  the  place  of  the  Tathagata  Nagabhibhu. 
7.  Twenty-five  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas  will  be  born  in 
the  world  Sukhdvati  from  the  place  of  the  Tathagata 
Vira(^a//prabha.  8.  Sixteen  ko/ls  of  Bodhisattvas 
will  be  born  in  the  world  Sukhavati  from  the  place 
of  the    Tathagata   Siwha.      9.   Eighteen    thousand 

'  Wliat  is  meant  is  that  ihcir  number  is  much  larger. 


§  42.  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  6'] 

Bodhisattvas  will  be  born  in  the  world  Sukha- 
vati  from  the  place  of  the  Tathagata  Siwha  (sic). 
lO.  Eighty-one  niyutas  of  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas  will 
be  born  in  the  world  Sukhavati  from  the  place  of 
the  Tathagata  ^Sriku/a.  1 1.  Ten  niyutas  of  ko/is  of 
Bodhisattvas  will  be  born  in  the  world  Sukha- 
vati from  the  place  of  the  Tathagata  Narendrara^a. 
12.  Twelve  thousand  Bodhisattvas  will  be  born  in 
the  world  Sukhavati  from  the  place  of  the  Tathagata 
Balabhi^;/a.  1 3.  Twenty-five  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas  \ 
who  have  obtained  strength,  having  gone  to  one 
place  in  one  week  of  eight  days,  and  having  turned 
to  the  West  during  ninety  hundred  thousand 
niyutas  of  ko/is  of  kalpas  ^,  will  be  born  in  *  the 
world  Sukhavati  from  the  place  of  the  Tathagata 
Pushpadhva^a.  14.  Twelve  ko/ls  of  Bodhisattvas 
will  be  born  in  the  world  Sukhavati  from  the  place 
of  the  Tathagata  6^valanadhipati.  15.  From  the 
place  of  the  Tathagata  Vaii^aradyaprapta,  sixty-nine 
ko^is  of  Bodhisattvas  will  be  born  in  the  world 
Sukhavati,  in  order  to  see  the  Tathagata  Amitabha, 
to  bow  before  him,  to  worship  him,  to  ask  questions 
of  him,  and  to  consult  him.  For  this  reason,  O 
A^ita,  I  might  proclaim  during  a  full  niyuta  of  ko^'is 
of  kalpas  the  names  of  those  Tathagatas,  from 
whom  the  Bodhisattvas  proceed  in  order  to  see 
that  Tathagata  Amitabha  in  the  world  Sukhavati,  to 

^  It  should  be  paTz/i-avi/wjatir. 

2  Sahghavarman's  translation  of  this  passage  is :  '  Within  seven 
days  they  can  take  hold  of  the  firm  conditions  (dharmas)  practised 
by  a  noble-minded  one  during  hundred  thousands  of  ko/is  of  kalpas.' 
Bodhiru/ti's  is :  '  Within  seven  days  they  can  cause  beings  to 
separate  from  their  state  of  transmigration  during  hundred  thou- 
sands of  niyutas  of  ko/is.' 

*  F  2 


68  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVATt,  §43. 

bow  before  him,  and  to  worship  him,  and  yet  the 
end  could  not  be  reached. 

}  43.  '  See,  O  A^ta,  what  easy  gains  are  gained 
by  those  beings  who  will  hear  the  name  of  the 
Tathagata  Amitabha,  holy  and  fully  enlightened. 
Nor  will  those  beings  be  of  little  faith  \  who  will 
obtain  at  least  one  joyful  thought  of  that  Tathagata 
and  of  this  treatise  of  the  Law.  Therefore  now,  O 
A;nta,  I  invite  you,  and  command  you  to  proclaim 
this  treatise  of  the  Law,  before  the  world  together 
with  the  gods.  Having  plunged  into  the  vast  uni- 
verse full  of  fire,  no  one  ought  to  turn  back,  if  he 
has  but  once  conceived  the  thought  of  going  across. 
And  why  ?  Because  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas  indeed, 
O  A^ita,  return  from  the  highest  perfect  knowledge, 
on  account  of  not  hearincr  such  treatises  of  the  Law 
as  this.  Therefore,  from  a  wish  for  this  treatise  of 
the  Law,  a  great  effort  should  be  made  to  hear, 
learn,  and  remember  it,  and  to  study  it  for  the  sake 
of  fully  grasping  it  and  widely  making  it  known,  A 
good  copy  of  it  should  be  kept,  after  it  has  been 
copied  in  a  book,  if  only  during  one  night  and  day, 
or  even  during  the  time  necessary  for  milking  a  cow. 
The  name  of  Master  should  be  given  to  a  teacher 
who  desires  to  conduct  quickly  innumerable  beings 
to  the  state  of  never  returning-  from  the  hiofhest 
perfect  knowledge,  namely,  in  order  that  they  may 
see  the  Buddha  country  of  that  blessed  Amitabha, 
the  Tathtigata,  and  to  acquire  the  excellent  per- 
fection of  the  array  of  good  qualities  peculiar  to  his 
own  Buddha  country. 


'  Illnfidliiinuklika,  sec  Va^'-ra/X7/v.-dikd  XV;  or  '  following  the 
lower  Law.' 


§  44-  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  69 

*  And,  O  A^Ita,  such  beings  will  have  easily  gained 
their  gains  who,  having  amassed  a  stock  of  merit, 
having  performed  service  under  former  6"inas,  and 
having  been  guided  by  Buddhas,  shall  hear  in  future, 
until  the  destruction  of  the  good  Law,  such-like 
excellent  treatises  of  the  Law,  treatises  which  are 
praised,  eulogized,  and  approved  of  by  all  Buddhas, 
and  convey  quickly  the  great  knowledge  of  omni- 
science. And  those  also  who,  when  they  have  heard 
it,  shall  obtain  excellent  delight  and  pleasure,  and 
will  learn,  retain,  recite  and  grasp,  and  wisely  preach 
it  to  others,  and  be  delighted  by  its  study,  or,  having 
copied  it  at  least,  will  worship  it,  will  certainly  pro- 
duce much  good  work,  so  that  it  is  difficult  to 
count  it. 

*  Thus  indeed,  O  A^ita,  I  have  done  what  a  Tatha- 
gata  ought  to  do.  It  is  now  for  you  to  devote 
yourself  to  it  without  any  doubt.  Do  not  doubt 
the  perfect  and  unfailing  knowledge  of  Buddha.  Do 
not  enter  into  the  dungeon  made  of  gems  built  up 
in  every  way.  For  indeed,  the  birth  of  a  Buddha, 
O  A^ita,  is  difficult  to  be  met  with,  so  is  the  instruc- 
tion in  the  Law,  and  also  a  timely  blrdi  \  O  A^ita, 
the  way  to  gain  the  perfection  (paramita)  of  all  stocks 
of  merit  has  been  proclaimed  by  me.  Do  now  exert 
yourselves  and  move  forward.  O  A^ita,  I  grant 
indeed  a  great  favour  to  this  treatise  of  the  Law.  Be 
valiant  so  that  the  laws  of  Buddhas  may  not  perish 
or  disappear.  Do  not  break  the  command  of  the 
Tathagata.' 

§  44.  Then  at  that  time,  the  Bhagavat  spoke  these 
verses  : 

^  Of  the  hearer ;  so  that  the  student  should  be  born  at  a  time 
when  there  is  a  Buddha  on  earth. 


70  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAT?,  §  44. 

1.  'Such  hearings  of  me  will  not  be  for  people 
who  have  not  done  good  ;  but  those  who  are  heroes 
and  perfect,  they  will  hear  this  speech. 

2.  '  And  those  by  whom  the  Lord  of  the  world, 
the  enlightened  and  the  light-giver,  has  been  seen, 
and  the  law  been  heard  reverentially,  will  obtain 
the  highest  joy. 

3.  '  Low  people  of  slothful  minds  cannot  find  any 
delight  in  the  laws  of  Buddha ;  those  who  have 
worshipped  in  the  Buddha  countries  learn  the  service 
of  the  Lords  of  the  three  worlds. 

4.  '  As  a  blind  man  in  darkness  does  not  know 
the  way,  and  much  less  can  show  it,  so  also  he  who 
is  (only)  a  6Vivaka  ^  in  the  knowledge  of  Buddha  ; 
how  then  should  beings  who  are  ignorant ! 

5.  '  The  Buddha  only  knows  the  virtues  of  a 
Buddha  ;  but  not  gods,  Nagas,  Asuras,  Yakshas,  and 
^'ravakas  (disciples) ;  even  for  Anekabuddhas-  there 
is  no  such  way,  as  when  the  knowledge  of  a  Buddha 
is  being  manifested. 

6.  '  If  all  beings  had  attained  bliss,  knowing  the 
highest  meaning  in  pure  wisdom,  they  would  not 
in  ko/is  of  kalpas  or  even  in  a  longer  time  tell  all 
the  virtues  of  one  Buddha. 

7.  '  Thereupon  they  would  attain  Nirvdwa,  preach- 
ing for  many  ko/ls  of  kalpas,  and  yet  the  measure 
of  the  knowledge  of  a  Buddha  would  not  be  reached, 
for  such  is  the  wondcrfulness  of  the  knowledge  of 

o 

the  6*inas. 

8.  'Therefore  a  learned  man  of  an  intelligent 
race^  who  believes  my  words,  after  having  perceived 


'  Those  who  are  as  yet  liearcrs  only  of  the  Law. 

*  Should  it  be  Pratyekabuddhas  ? 

*  The  text  is  evidently  corrupt,  and  the  translation  conjectural. 


§  45-  THE    LAND    OF    BLISS,  7 1 

all  paths  of  the  knowledge  of  the  6^inas,  should  utter 
speech,  saying,  "  Buddha  is  wise." 

9.  '  Now  and  then  a  man  is  found,  now  and  then 
a  Buddha  appears,  knowledge  of  the  object  of  faith 
is  acquired  after  a  long  time, — therefore  one  should 
strive  to  acquire  (the  knowledge  of)  the  object  (of 
faith)  \' 

§  45.  And  while  this  treatise  of  the  Law  was  being 
delivered,  twelve  ko/is  of  niyutas  of  beings  obtained 
the  pure  and  spotless  eye  of  the  Law  with  regard 
to  Laws.  Twenty-four  hundred  thousand  niyutas 
of  ko/is  of  beings  obtained  the  Anagamin^  reward. 
Eight  hundred  Bhikshus  had  their  thoughts  delivered 
from  faults  so  as  to  cling  no  more  to  anything. 
Twenty-five  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas  obtained  resigna- 
tion to  things  to  come.  And  by  forty  hundred 
thousand  niyutas  of  ko/is  of  the  human  and  divine 
race,  thoughts  such  as  had  never  risen  before  were 
turned  toward  the  highest  perfect  knowledge,  and 
their  stocks  of  merit  were  made  to  o^row  toward 
their  being  born  in  the  world  Sukhavati,  from  a  desire 
to  see  the  Tathagata,  the  blessed  Amitabha.  And 
all  of  them  having  been  born  there,  will  in  proper 
order  be  born  in  other  worlds,  as  Tathagatas,  called 
Ma;lcaisvara  (sweet-voiced).  And  eighty  ko/is  of 
niyutas  having  acquired  resignation  under  the  Tatha- 
gata Dipahkara,  never  turning  back  again  from  the 
highest  perfect  knowledge,  rendered  perfect  by  the 

^  The  tenth  verse  is  again  unintelligible,  but  may  have  meant 
something  like  that  '  those  who  having  heard  the  best  Laws,  are 
joyful  in  remembering  Sugata,  are  our  friends  in  time  past,  and 
they  also  who  wish  for  enlightenment.' 

^  One  who  is  not  born  again,  except  in  the  Brahma  world,  and 
then  may  obtain  Nirva«a. 


72  DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKIIAVAtJ,  §§  4^J,  4  7- 

Tathagata  Amitayus,  practising  the  duties  of  former 
Bodhisattvas,  will  carry  out,  after  they  are  born  in 
the  world  Sukhavati,  the  duties  enjoined  in  the 
former  Pra^/idhanas  (prayers). 

§  46.  At  that  time  this  universe  (the  three  millions 
of  worlds)  trembled  in  six  ways.  And  various  miracles 
were  seen.  On  earth  everything  was  perfect,  and 
human  and  divine  instruments  were  played,  and  the 
shout  of  joy  was  heard  as  far  as  the  world  of  the 
Akanish///as. 

§  47.  Thus  spoke  the  Bhagavat  enraptured,  and 
the  noble-minded  Bodhisattva  A^ita,  and  the  blessed 
Ananda,  the  whole  Assembly,  and  the  world,  with 
gods,  men,  spirits,  mighty  birds,  and  fairies,  applauded 
the  speech  of  the  Bhagavat. 

The  praise  of  the  beauty  of  the  excellences  of 
Sukhavati,  the  country  of  the  blessed  Amitabha,  the 
Tathagata,  the  entry  of  the  Bodhisattva  on  the 
stage  of  '  never  returning,'  the  story  of  Amitabha, 
the  Mahayanasutra  of  the  Description  of  Sukhavati 
is  finished. 


THE    LAND    OF    BLISS.  73 


NOTE 

BY  THE  REV.  BUNYIU  NANJIO,  IM.A., 

ON  THE  TWO  PRAiVIDHANAS, 
THE   18th   and   21st,    MISSING  IN  THE  TEXT. 

In  the  Chinese  translations  of  the  Larger  Sukhavati- 
vyuha,  made  by  Sarighavarman,  A.  D.  252,  and  Bodhiru^i, 
A.  D.  693-713,  there  are  altogether  48  Pra;ndhanas,  not  46, 
as  in  the  Sanskrit  text.  The  18th  and  the  21st  in  the 
translations  are  evidently  wanting  in  the  Sanskrit  text, 
and  the  latter  part  of  the  19th  Prawidhana  in  that  text 
is  the  latter  part  of  the  lost  18th,  according  to  the  trans- 
lations. This  1 8th  Pra;/idhana,  however,  is  so  important 
that  it  is  called  by  Gen-ku,  the  teacher  of  Shin-ran,  the 
founder  of  the  Shin-shiu  sect, '  the  king  of  the  Prawidhanas.' 

Sarighavarman's  translation  of  the  i8th,  2Cth,  and  21st 
is  as  follows : — 

18.  'When  I  have  obtained  Buddhahood,  if  those  beings 
who  are  in  the  ten  quarters  should  believe  in  me  with 
serene  thoughts,  and  should  wish  to  be  born  in  my  coun- 
try, and  should  have  say  ten  times  thought  of  me  (or 
repeated  my  name), — if  they  should  not  be  born  there, 
may  I  not  obtain  the  perfect  knowledge ;— barring  only 
those  beings  who  have  committed  the  five  deadly  sins, 
and  who  have  spoken  evil  of  the  good  Law.' 

The  18th  Pra;/idhana  in  the  Sanskrit  text  agrees  with 
the  19th  in  both  Chinese  translations;  but  the  20th  in 
these  translations  is  somewhat  shorter  than  the  1 9th  in  the 
Sanskrit  text.   The  shorter  translation  is  as  follows : — 


74  DESCRIPTION    OF   SUKMAVAt}, 

20.  *  When  I  have  obtained  Buddhahood,  if  those  beings 
who  are  in  the  ten  quarters,  after  the)'  have  heard  my 
name,  should  direct  their  thoughts  towards  my  country 
and  should  plant  the  roots  of  merit  (or  prepare  their  stock 
of  merit),  and  should  bring  them  to  maturity  with  their 
serene  thoughts,  and  wish  to  be  born  in  my  country, — if 
they  should  not  accomplish  (their  desire),  may  I  not  obtain 
the  perfect  knowledge. 

21.  'When  I  have  obtained  Buddhahood,  if  gods  and 
men  in  my  country  should  not  all  be  endowed  perfectly 
with  the  thirty-two  marks  of  the  great  man,  may  I  not 
obtain  the  perfect  knowledge.' 


I  have  tried  to  restore  the  Sanskrit  text  for  the  above 
three  Pra/zidhanas,  in  accordance  with  the  Chinese  trans- 
lations. 

The  1 8th  may  be  formed  chiefly  out  of  the  19th  in  the 
text,  something  as  follows  : — 

Note. — The  fulfilment  of  this  PrawidhAna  is  given  in  the 
text  (p.  47,  11.  1-4),  as  the  reason  of  the  fulfilment  of 
the  1 7th  :— 

H-d4J?qT^f7T      ?r     ^"^A^fT^rn^     ^'(^TlTi<|ij  i:     W^^- 

^tv:  II  ^^  II 

In  the  Chinese  translations,  the  exception  of  two  kinds 
of  beings  is  repeated  at  the  end  of  this  fulfilment. 


THE   LAND   OF   BLISS.  75 

The  20th  (i.e.  19th  in  the  text)  may  then  be  shortened 
like  this  : — 

^n?T^^f^wfH^^T^^  II 

The  fulfilment  of  this  Prawidhdna  may  be  the  27th 
chapter  in  the  text,  with  the  exception  of  some  portion  on 
the  appearance  of  Amitdbha  before  a  dying  man,  which 
belongs  to  the  19th  (i.e.  i8th  in  the  text)  Pra;^idhana. 

"^  ^^^mf ^^Tf^   ITfllI^T^f?T  "  I   (rTfT^)W   (ft  »T^^  J^l) 

i?^^fc(TH^fn:  ^cT^%^  g^T^rirf  ^^^rnnf ^^(^^  i  (p-  47-) 


The  3 1st  may  be  like  this  : — 

II 5^^  II  ^c%^  5T3i^^f>^TnF^  fT"^  1^%^  %  ^'Wi:  3T(inwrcn 

T^rTTt  ^n^T^^tf^WfJT^'^^  II 

This  Prawidhana  is  found  in  the  Tibetan  translation. 

The    fulfilment    of   this   Pra/ndhana    is   to  be   found  in 
chap.  ^^  (p.  56)  as  follows  : — 

B.  N. 


INDEX   OF  WORDS. 


Roman  numerals  refer  to  the  chapters,  Arabic  figures  with  p.  to  the  pages 
of  the  edition  of  the  Sanskrit  text  in  the  Anecdota  Oxoniensia, 
without  p.  to  the  verses  in  certain  chapters.  Arabic  figures  in 
parentheses  give  the  number  in  the  lists  of  names. 


Akanish//ja,  XVII. 

Akanish//ja-bhavana,  the  abode  of 
the  Akanish//6as,  XL,  p.  64  ; 
XLVI. 

akujala,  sin,  XVIII,  p.  40, 

akshawopapatti,  of  untimely  birth, 
XV. 

a^ata,  not  born,  XVIII,  p.  40. 

a^atismara,  forgetful  of  former 
births,  XXXVI  (conjecture). 

A^ita,  the  Bodhisattva  A^ita, 
XL,  p.  64. 

A^«anavidhvawsana,  N.  of  a  Tatha- 
gata.  III  (64). 

Ativiryaprabha  =  Amitabha,  XII, 
p.  29. 

Atulyaprabha  =  Amitabha,  XII, 
p.  29. 

aduMhasukhavedana,  perceiving 
\\hat  is  neither  pain  nor  plea- 
sure, XVIII,  p.  40. 

Anantarya,  crimes  (five),  VIII,  19. 

anabhisawskara,  not  made,  XVIII, 
P-  40. 

Anagami-(phala),  the  Anagamin's 
(reward),  reward  of  not  being 
born  again  on  earth,  XLV, 
p.  76  (conjectural  reading). 

Anibandhaniyaprabha  =  Amitabha, 
XII,  p.  29. 

animitta,  causelessness,  X,  p.  26. 

animitta,unconditioned,XVIII,p.  40. 

aniyata,  not  bent  on  anything  (?), 
XXIV. 

Aniruddha,  N.  pr.,  I  (20). 

anutpattikadharmakshanti,  resigna- 
tion to  consequences  which  have 
not  yet  arisen,  XVIII,  p.  40; 
XXXII  end;  XLV,  p.  76. 


anutpada,  without  origin,  XVIII, 
p.  40. 

Anupalipta,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  1 1 1  (8). 

anulomiki  kshanti,  resignation  to 
natural  consequences,  XX XII 
end. 

Anekabuddha,  pi.  Pratyekabuddhas  ? 
XLIV,  5. 

apaya,  misery,  XVIII,  p.  40. 

aprawihita,  purposelessness,  X,  p.  26. 

aprawihita,  free  from  desire,  XVIII, 
p.  40. 

Apratihatarajmiragaprabha  =  Ami- 
tabha, XII,  p.  29. 

Apsaras,  the  Apsarases,  XIX,  p.  42  ; 
XXIII. 

abhava,  not-being,  XVIII,  p.  40. 

Abhibhuyanarendrabhutrayendra- 
prabha  [by  conjecture]  =  Ami- 
tabha, XII,  p.  29. 

Abhibhuyalokapalajakrabrahmajud- 
dhavasamahejvarasarvadeva^^ih- 
mikara«aprabha  =  Amitabha, 
XII,  p.  29. 

abhishekabhGmipratilambha,  attain- 
ment of  the  royal  stage,  XVIII, 
p.  40. 

abhisambudh  (samyaksambodhim), 
obtain  the  highest  perfect 
knowledge,  XI  ;   XIV. 

amanushya,  not-man,  XXXIX, 
p.  63. 

amatya,  minister,  X,  p.  27. 

Amitaprabha,  Amitaprabhasa  =  Ami- 
tabha, XII,  p.  29;  XXXI,  5, 
20;  XXXlX,p.  62;  XLII  (4). 

Amitabha,  I  ;  XI  to  XV;  XXVI  to 
XXXI;  XXXIX;  XLV,  p.  76. 

Amitayu,  XXXI,  1-4,  11,  17. 


78 


DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVATI. 


Amitaviis     =      Amitabha,       XIV  ; 

XXXII  ;    XXXVII,     p.    58  ; 

XXXIX,  p.  62;    XLV,  p.  76. 
Amogharajj^.i,  N.  pr.,  I  (28). 
arthaviua,  cause  and  effect,  XXX. 
Arhat,    holv,    I;     XI  ;      XXVII  ; 

XXVIII  ;   XXXII;  XXXIX, 

p.  6.. 
Avalukilejvara,        Buddha's       son, 

XXXI,  13  ;  XXXIV. 
Avi/ti,  hell.  IV,  10. 
Avidyandhakaravidhvawsanakara,  N. 

of  a  Tathagata,  III  (35). 
avaivartika,  never  returning  (for  a 

new  birth),   XXXI,   18.      See 

also    XXXII,    p.    55;     XLII, 

p.  69  ;    XLV,  p.  76. 
avaivartikatva,  the   state    of  never 

returning,  XLIII,  p.  72. 
Ajva^it,  N.  pr.,  1(2). 
Asaiigataprabha  =  Amitabha,    XII, 

p.  29. 
Asamaptaprabha  =  Amitabha,  XII, 

p.  29. 
Asura,  Asuras,  VIII,  i,  2  ;  X,  p.  25  ; 

XII,  p.  30;    XXXIX,  p.  63; 

XLIV,  5;  XLVII. 

aiaryopadhyaya,  teachers  and  mas- 
ters, X,  p.  26. 

A_g-«atakau«//inya,  X.  pr.,  I  (i). 

Ananda,  N.pr.,'1  (34)  ;  II, &c.;  XI, 
&c.  <S:c. 

aramaparigraha,  predial  property 
with  regard  to  monasteries, 
XXII. 

Arya,  XII,  p.  30. 

avewikabuddhadharma,  freedom 

from  attaclimcnt,  XVIII,  p.  40. 

ajrava,  fault,  XLV,  p.  76. 

asura-kava,  the  body  of  Asuras, 
VIII,  I,  2;  XV. 

UttaptavaidTiryanirbhasa,    N.    of    a 

Tathagata,  III  (30). 
uttari^arya,    the    higher     practice, 

VIII,  20. 
Udaka^anilra,    N   of  a    Tathagata, 

MI  (34). 
«nnii>}.i,'a,  (jucstion,  II,  p.  4. 
upaj.anta,  peace,  XVIII,  p.  40. 
upadhyfiya,     teacher,     X,     p.     26  ; 

XLIII.  p.  72. 
Up.isaka,  layman,     Jyvyiv       r 
Upisika,  laywoman,!  ^^  ^'^'  •'•  '^5- 


Uposha«iyaprabha  =  Amitabha,  X 1 1, 
Uruvilvakajyapa,  N.  pr.,  I  (10). 

r/ddhi,  miraculous  power,  VIII,  5. 

r/ddhimat,  endowed  with  mira- 
culous power,  XIII,  p.  31. 

r/ddhivajita,  miraculous  power, 
VIII,  5;  XIII,  p.  31. 

r/ddhibala,        miraculous        power, 

XXXI,  16,  21. 

ekaq-atipratibaddha,  bound    to    one 

'  birth  only,  VIII,  20;  XXXIII. 

cka^atiya,  of  one  birth  only,  XXXI, 

18. 
ckayanamarga,  the  path  of  one  ve- 
hicle, XXXVIII,  p.  59. 

aupapaduka,  born  miraculously, 
XLI,  p.  65. 

Kampila,  N.  pr.,  I  (22). 

karman  (karmawaw  vipaka/»,  kar- 
mabhisawskara/^,  the  result  of 
works,  and  the  outcome  of 
works),  XVII,  p.  37. 

kama,  lust,  X,  p.  25. 

Karu«ika,   N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(75). 
Kalaparvata,  black  mountain,  XVII 

beg.;  XXXIX,  p.  63. 
Kinnara,     Kinnaras,    XII,    p.    30; 

XXXIX,  p.  63. 
Kumarakajyapa,  N.  pr.,  I  (13). 
kujalamQIa,   stock   of  merit,    VIII, 

19,     22,    27,    41,    42;     XVII  ; 

XVIII,       p.      40;        XXVII; 

XXVIII;     XXXVII,    p.    58; 

XXXVIII,  p.  60,  &c. 
Kusumaprabha,  N.  of  a  Tathagata, 

III  (50). 
Kusumavr/'sh/yabhiprakir«a,  N.  of  a 

Tath.agata,  III  (51). 
Kusuniasambhava,  N.  of  a  Tatha- 

g.ita.  Ill  (45). 
Kusun)abhi^/7a,  N.  of  a  Tathagata, 

III  (63). 
Kcjarin,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III  (65). 
kshatriya,  Kshatriyas,  X,  p.  27. 
k>hanti,  endurance,  VIII,  46;    pa- 
tience  (paramita),    X,    p.    26  ; 

three      kinds     of     resignation, 

XXXII,  p.  55. 

Khadiravanika,  N.  pr.,  I  (25). 


INDEX    OF    WORDS. 


79 


Gandharva,  XII,  p.  30;  XXXIX, 
p.  63;   XLVII. 

gandharvara^a  (doubtful,  text  prob- 
ably corrupt),  XIX,  p.  41, 

Gayakajyapa,  N.  pr.,  I  (12). 

Garu</a  and  Garu^as,  XII,  p.  30  ; 
XXXIX,  p.  63  ;  XLVII. 

gatha,  verse,  IV;  IX;  XXV; 
XXXI;   XLIV. 

Girira^aghosha,  N.  of  a  Tathagata, 
III  (12). 

Girira^aghoshejvara,  N.  of  a  Tatha- 
gata, III  (49). 

Gr/dhrakQ/a,  the  mountain  G.,  I, 

gr;hapati,  householder,  X,  p.  27. 

ghoshanuga  (kshanti,  resignation), 
following  the  sound,  XXXII 
end. 

^akravartitva,  sovereignty,  X,  p.  27. 
iTakravat/a      (mountains),       XVII  ; 

XXXIX,  p.  63. 
ATandana,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III  (6). 
^andanagandha,  N.  of  a  Tathagata, 

in  (4, 54). 

ATandabhibhtl,   N.  of  a   Tathagata, 

III  (18). 
^andraprabha,  N.  of  a  Tathagata, 

in  (47). 

ATandrabhanu,   N.  of  a  Tathagata, 

III  (45). 

^andrasurya^ihmikara«a,  N.  of  a 
Tathagata,  III  (29). 

>farya^ara«a,  practice  of  discipline, 
XXXVIII,  p.  59. 

Hturmaharajrakayika  (gods),  con- 
sisting of  the  companies  of  the 
four  Mahara^?-as,  XVII. 

Alttadharabuddhisaiikusumitabhyu- 
dgata,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

>tintama«iratna,  jewel  which  yields 

every  wish,  XXXII. 
ATuUapatka,  N.  pr.,  I  (31). 

Gambudvipejvara,  sovereign  of 
India,  X,  p.  27. 

^atismara,  possessed  of  the  recollec- 
tion of  former  births,  VIII,  6  ; 
XXXI,  16;  XXXVI. 

Gambunadasuvarwa,  gold  coming 
from  the  river  G.,  II,  p.  3. 

Gina  =  Buddha,  II,  p.  3;  IX,  9; 
XXV,  5;  XLIII,p.72;  XLIV, 
7,8. 


Ginabala,  Gina-power,  XXXVIII, 
p.  61. 

Ginasuta/',  sons  of  the  Gina, 
^  XXXVIII,  p.  6r. 

^wanadarjana,  intellectual  know- 
ledge, II,  p.  4- 

Gyotishprabha,  N.  of  a  Tathagata, 
III  (15);    XLII  (3). 

Gvalanadhipati,  a  Tathagata,  XLII 
(14). 

Tathagata,  list  of  eighty-one  T.'s, 

III;     XI;    XII;     XXXVIII, 

p.  62,  &c.  &c. 
tiryagyoni,  brute-creation,  VIII,  i, 

2;  XV. 
Tishva,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III  (38). 
Tush'ita,  XVII. 
Turyaghosha,   N.   of  a   Tathagata, 

JII(i9). 
Trayastriwja  (gods),  XL,  p.  65. 
trisahasramahasahasra,     the     three 

millions  of  spheres  of  worlds, 

VIII,    12  ;       XLIII,    p.    71  ; 

XLVI. 
traidhatukasamata,    equilibrium    of 

the  three  elements,  XXXVIII, 

p.  59- 

dana,  liberality,  X,  p.  26  (paramita). 
divyaw?    ^akshus,    the    divine    eye, 

VIII,     7,    26;      XXXI,     16; 

XXXVIII,  p.  59  (opp.  mawsa- 

/Jakshus). 
divyaw     jrotram,   the    divine    ear, 

VIII,  8;  XXXI,  16. 
Dipahkara,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(0- 

du^kha,  pain,  XVIII,  p.  40, 
durgati,  distress,  XVIII,  p.  40. 
Dushprasaha, aTatliagata,  XLII  (i). 
deva,  god,   XII,  p.  30;    XXXIX, 

p.  63  ;    XLVII,  &c. 
devanagasurayakshajravaka/',  X  L I V, 

5- 
devarajatva,  sovereignty  of  the  gods, 
X,  p.  27. 

dharma.  Law,  XVIII,  pp.  39,  40  ; 

dharmaw  dejayati,  XI. 
dharma,  a  thing,  XXXVIII,  p.  59. 
dharma,  plur.  (gambhlra,  profound), 

doctrines,  XXIX. 
dharmakatha,  the  story  of  the  Law, 

XXXVIII  beg. 
Dharmaketu,   N.   of  a    Tathagata, 

HI  (70). 


8o 


DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVAtJ. 


dharnia>takraprnvartana,  turning  the 

wheel  ot  the  Law,  X,  p.  27. 
dharniJiXakshiis,    eve   of    the    Law, 

XXXVllI,p.'59;  XLV,  p.  76. 
Dhaniiamati,   N.   of    a    Tathagata, 

111(78). 
Dharmamativinanditarag-a,  N.  of  a 

Tathagata,  III  (39). 
Dharmakara,  N,  of  a  Bhikshu,  III 

end;   IV;   V;   VI  ;    VII  ;     X, 

p.  25  ;  XI. 
dharmolka,     torch     of    the     Law, 

XXXVIII,  p.  61. 
dhatu,  cause,  XXXVIII,  p.  59. 
Dharawis,  VIII,  33. 

dhvana  (paramita),  meditation,   X, 
'   p.  26. 

Nadikajyapa,  N.  pr.,  I  (11). 
Nanda,  N.  pr.,  I  (32). 
Nandika,  N.  pr.,  I  (21), 
Narcndra,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(74).  ^ 
Narendrara^a,  a  Tathagata,    XLII 

Naga     and     Nagas,     XII,    p.    30; 

XXXIX,  p.  63  ;  XLIV,  5. 
Nagabhibhu,    N.    of    a    Tathagata, 

_    III  (lo);  XLII  (6). 
Narayawava^^ra,    the    diamond     (or 

thunderbolt?)  of  N.,  VIII,  25. 
Ninii,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III  (56). 
niraya,  hell,  VIII,  i,  2  ;   XV. 
nirodha,  cessation,  XVIII,  p.  40. 
nirodha,  Nirvawa,  XXI,  p.  44. 
Nirniawarati,  XVII. 
nirva/za,  XXIV. 
nirv//ta    bhQ,    to    attain     Nirvawa, 

XLIV,  7. 
nishparidaha,  free  from  pain,  VIII, 

37. 
nlvara;ja,  obstacle,  XVIII,  p.  40. 

I)a>l^ama«</alanamaskara,  prostrate 
reverence,  VIII,  35. 

Patka,  N.  pr.,  I  (30), 

I)adma,  lotus  (men  born  in  lotus- 
flowers),  XL  ;  XLI. 

Padmabimbvupajobhita,  N.  of  a 
Tathagata,  III  (53). 

para/'itta^wana,  knowledge  of  the 
thoughts  of  other  people,  VIII, 
9- 

Paranirmilavajavartin  (gods),  XVH ; 
XiX,  p.  41  ;    XX  ;   XL,  p.  65. 

paramartha,  highest  truth,  XXV,  i. 


parigrahasaw?-;7a,  idea  of  possession, 
VIII,  lo^ 

pariwam,  causat.,  to  bring  to  matu- 
rity, VIII,  19. 

parinirvawa,  the  Nirvawa,  VI II,  20; 
XXXIII. 

parinirvr/ta,  having  entered  Nir- 
va«a,  XI. 

parikshaXitta  (ksha.'),  having  inquir- 
ing thoughts,  I. 

parshad,  the  Assembly,  VII  ;  IX,  8  ; 
XLVII. 

paramikovida,  knowing  the  highest 
wisdom,  XXXI,  16. 

Paramita,  highest  perfection,  II, 
p.4;VIII,5;X,p.26;XVIII, 
p.  40. 

Parayawika,  N.  pr.,  I  (29). 

purushadamyasarathi,  III,  p.  7. 

Pushpadhva^a,  a  Tathagata,    XLII 

(13). 
Pushpakara,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

Pushpavativanara^asankusumitabhi- 
gfiz.,   N.    of  a   Tathagata,    III 

Pur«a-IMaitraya«iputra,  N.  pr.,  I  (9). 
purva^ina,    former    Ginas,   XXXII 

end;  XXXVII  end. 
purvadattadharmajravawa,     hearing 

of    the    Law    formerly    given, 

XXXVII  end. 
purvaprawidhana,    former     prayers, 

XXXII  end;  XXXVII  end; 

XLV  end. 
pra^;7a   (paramita),    knowledge,    X, 

p.  26. 
pra^«aXakshus,     eye     of     wisdom, 

XXXVIII,  p.  59. 
prajwaparamita.  transcendental  wis- 
dom, XXXVIII,  p.  59. 
prawidha,  to  pray,  XXVII. 
I)ra«i(lliana,  prayer,  VI  ;  VII,  p.  1 1  ; 

VIII,  14,  20  ;  IX  ;  XII,  p.  29  ; 

see  pQrvaprawidhana. 
prawidhan.uaja,  the  power  of  praver, 

XXXIII. 
prawidhanasampad,     perfection      of 

prayer,  X,  p.  25. 
prawidhi,  prayer,  IV,  10;  IX,  9,  11  ; 

X,  p.  25  ;  XXXI,  17,  18. 
prawidliisthaiia,   subject   of    prayer, 

yil,  p.  II. 
Pratapavat,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(2). 
pratibhana,  understanding,  II,  p.  4, 


INDEX   OF  WORDS. 


8l 


pratisawvit,  perfect  knowledge,  VIII, 
28;  consciousness,  XVIII, 
p.  40. 

Pratyekabuddha,  VIII,  12. 

pradakshi;/ik/-/,  to  walk  round  re- 
spectfully, XXXI,  5. 

Prabhakara,    N.    of    a    Tathagata, 

in  (5). 

Prabhajikhotsr/sh^aprabha    =  Ami- 

tabha,  XII,  p.  29. 
Pramodaniyaprabha     =    Amitabha, 

XII,  p.  29. 
prajanta,  peace,  XVIII,  p.  40. 
pratiharya,  miracle,  XLVI. 
Praptasena,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(44). 

pretavishaya,  the  realm  of  the  de- 
parted spirits,  VIII,  I,  2  ;   XV. 

Prema«iyaprabha=Amitabha,  XII, 
p.  29. 

bala,  the  Balas  or  powers,  XVIII, 

p.  40. 
Balabhi^wa,    a     Tathagata,     XLII 

(12). 
Buddha,    II,   &c.,   sing,  and    plur. ; 

XII,  p.  29;  XXXI,  :,  &c.  &c. 
buddhakshetra,  a  Buddha  country, 

V;  VI;  VII;    XI;    XII,   &c. 

&c. 
buddha>^akshus,     eye     of    Buddha, 

XXXVIII,  p.  59. 
buddha^wana,  knowledge  of  Buddha, 

XXXVIII,  p.  59. 
buddhadharmasaiigha^,  Buddha,  the 

Law,  and  the  Church,  VIII,  46  ; 

X,  p.  26;  XVIII,  p.  39. 
buddhajastr/,  Buddha  teacher,  VIII, 

46. 
buddhasawgiti,    music    of    Buddha, 

XXXVIII,  p.  59. 
bodhi,  knowledge,  VIII,   isseqq.; 

XXVII;         XXXII,    p.    55; 

XXXVI;    XLI,  p.  69. 
bodhiparinishpatti,    perfect    know- 
ledge, XVIII,  p.  40. 
bodhivr/ksha,  a  Bodhi  tree,  VIII,  27; 

XXXII. 
Bodhisattva,  I ;  X,  p.  25,  sing,  and 

plur.;  XXX;  XXXI;  XXXIX, 

&c.  &c. 
bodhyahgasawgiti,    music     of    the 

Bodhyahgas,  XXXVIII,  p.  59. 
Brahmakayika,  XVII. 
Brahmaketu,   N.  of    a    Tathagata, 

III  (77). 

[49]  * 


Brahmaghosha,  N.  of  a  Tathagata, 

HI  (17,59). 
Brahman,  X,  p.  25  ;  XII,  p.  29. 
Brahmapurohita,  XVII. 
Brahmasvaranadabhinandita,    N.  of 

a  Tathagata,  III  (42). 
brahmawa,  Brahmawa,  X,  pp.  25,  27. 

Bhagavat,  I;  II,  &c. 

Bhadra^it,  N.  pr.,  I  (5). 

bhikshu,   a    mendicant    (nirodhasa- 

mapanna),    XXI,   p.   44,   &c. ; 

XXXIX,  p.  63. 
bhikshuwi,  nun,  XXXIX,  p.  63. 
bhumi,  the  Bhumis  or  stages,  XVIII, 

p.  40. 

Maw^usvara,  *  sweet-voiced '  (Tatha- 

gatas),  XLV,  p.  76. 
manushyamanushyaA,  men  and  not 

men, XII, p. 30;  XXXIX, p.63. 
mall  ?  IV,  8. 
maharddhika,  endowed  with  great 

supernatural  powers,  XL,  p.  65. 
Mahakaphila,  N.  pr.,  I  (18). 
mahakaruwa,  highest  compassion,  II, 

p.  4;  XVIII,  p.40. 
Mahakajyapa,  N.  pr.,  I  (14). 
Mahaketu,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(69). 
Mahakaush^Ailya,  N.  pr.,  I  (17). 
IMahagandhara^anirbhasa,    N.   of  a 

Tathagata,  III  (24). 
Mahaguwadhara,  N.  of  a  Tathagata, 

III  (61). 
Mahaguwadharabuddhipraptabhi^wa, 

N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III  (28).^ 
maha/^akravaa'a,     Great    ATakrava^a 

mountains,    XVII  ;    XXXIX, 

p.63. 
Maha/tunda,  N.  pr.,  I  (19). 
Mahatamalapatra-fandanakardama, 

N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III  (62). 
mahadharmadundubhi,     the     great 

drum  of  the  Law,  XXXVIII, 

p.  61. 
mahadharmadhvaij-a,  the  great  banner 

of  the  Law,  XXXVIII,  p.6i. 
mahadharmabheri,  the  great  kettle- 
drum of  the  Law,  XXXVIII, 

p.  61. 
mahadharmajahkha,  the  great  trum- 

pet-shellofthe  Law,  XXXVIII, 

p.  61. 
Mahanaga,  I,  p.  2  ;   II,  p.  3, 
Mahanaman,  N.  pr.,  I  (4). 


82 


DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVATJ. 


mahaparinirvawa,  VIII,  n. 
mahapurushalakshana,    the    (thirty- 
two)    marks   of  a   great   man, 

XVI,  p.  56;  XXXV. 
mahaprawidliana,  tlie  great  prayer, 

X,  p.  25. 
mah:U)rahmatva,  X,  p.  27. 
Ma'iribrahnian,  Ihc  great  Brahman, 

XVII  ;  XXXVIII,  p.  60. 
MalulmuXilinda,  XXXIX,  p.  63. 
maiiamudita, great  rejoicing,  XVIII, 

p.  40. 
Mahameru,the  great  Meru,XX  XIX, 

p.  63. 
mahamaitrf,    great     love,     XVIII, 

p.  40. 
INIaliamaiuIgalyayana,  N.  pr.,  I  (16). 
Maharaifas  (tour),  XVII,  p.  37. 
Mahavyuha,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(57). 
Mahajravaka,  great  disciple,  I,  p.  2 

(bis), 
mahasawnaha,  the  whole  armour  (of 

the  Law),  VIII,  20. 
Mahasthamaprapta,name  ofaBodhi- 

sattva,  XXXIV. 
Mahejvara,  XII,  p.  29  end. 
Mahopcksha,      great      forgiveness, 

XVIII.  p.  40. 
mahoraga,  XII,    p.    30;    XXXIX, 

p.  63. 
manusha,  men,  XLVII. 
Mara  (samaraka),  X,  p.  25. 
mithyatvaniyata,  bent  on  falsehood, 

XXIV. 
mimaw/sa,  philosophy,  II,  p.  4. 
mimawsa^/7;ina,  philosopiiical  know- 
ledge, II,  p.  3. 
MuktakusumapralimaWitaprabha, 

N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III  (20). 
]Mukta/(/(/'atra,  N.  of  a  Tatliagata, 

III  (66). 
Mukta^X/jatrapravatasadma,    N.   of 

a  Tathagata,  III  (37). 
MuXilinda,  XXXIX,  p.  63. 
Meru,  XXXVIII,  p.  59  ;  XXXIX, 

p.  63. 
McrukO/a,   N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(>  3,  ■«<■>)■ 
Maitraya/»iputra,  see  PQrwa-Maitra- 

yaw'iputra. 
Maitreya,  N.  of  a  Bodhisattva,  I  end. 
Maudgalyayana,  XIII,  p.  31. 

Vakshi,     Yakshas,     XII,     p.     50; 
XXXIX,  p.  63;  XLIV,  5. 


yathabhOtaprati^wa,  the  true  pro- 
mise, X,  p.  25. 

Yajodeva,  N.  pr.,  I  (6). 

Yama  devaA,  the  Yamadevas,  XVII, 
p.  37  ;   XL,  p.  65. 

Ra«a%aha,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(27). 
Ratnakctu,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(71). 
Ratna/tandra,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(52). 
ratnaparvata,jevvel-mountain,  XVII ; 

XXXIX,  p.  63. 
ratnavr/'ksha,  gem-tree,  XVI,  p.  33. 
Ratnajri,  N.   of  a   Tathagata,    III 

(72). 
Ratnakara,  a  Tathagata,  XLII  (2). 
Ratnabhibhasa,  N.  of  a  Tathagata, 

111(55). 
Rakshasa,  XXXIX,  p.  63. 
ragadveshamoha/),    illusion,   hatred, 

and  passion,  XXXVIII,  p.  61. 
Ra^g-ag/vha,  the  city,  I. 
Raj-aniyaprabha  =  Amitabha,  XII, 

p.  29. 
raji,  division  (two  divisions  of  beings), 

XXIV. 
Rahuia,  N.  pr.,  I  (33). 
rupajabdagandharasasprash/avya- 

dharma/',  all   qualilied   objects 

of  senses,  X,  p.  26. 
rfipajabdagandharasasprash/avya- 

saw^wa,  the  idea  of  form,  sound, 

smell,  taste,  and  touch,  X,  p.  25. 
Revata,  N.  pr.,  I  (24). 

lokadhatii,  world,  VIII,  7,  18,  &c. 
lokanatha,  protector  of  the  world, 

IX,  3. 
Lokapala.  XII,  p.  29. 
lokapalatva,  X,  p.  27. 
Lokapradipa,    a    Tathagata,    XLII 

(5)- 
Lokasiindara,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(76). 
Lokendra,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(36,73]. 
Lokejvarara^a,  N.  of  a  Tathagata, 
III  (8if;   IV;  V;   VI;  VII. 

Vakula,  N.  pr.,  I  (26). 

Varaprabha,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(23). 
vajavartitva,  X,  p.  27. 
viuila,  self-control,  VIII,  5. 


INDEX    OF    WORDS. 


83 


vas,  to  perform  one's  religious  duties, 

I,  p.  I. 
Vashpa,  N.  pr.,  I  (3). 
vinipata,  destruction,  XVIII,  p.  40. 
vibhuti    (puwya),    (holy)    miraculous 

power  (of  Buddhas),  XVII. 
Vimala,  N.  pr.,  I  (7), 
Vimalanetra,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(48). 
Vimalaprabha,  III  (9). 
Vimalanana,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

Vira^a^prabha,  a  Tathagata,  XLII 

viraga,  passionlessness,  XVIII,  p.  40. 
viveka,  retirement,  XVIII,  p.  40. 
vihiwsa,  cruelty,  X,  p.  25. 
virya,  strength,  X,  p.  26  (paramita). 
Vai^uryagarbha,  N.  of  a  Tathagata, 

III  (68).  ^ 
Vai^uryanirbhasa,   N.  of  a    Tatha- 

^gata.  III  (16). 
vaijaradya,  experience,  fearlessness, 

XVIII,  p.  40. 
Vaijaradyaprapta,  a  Tathagata,  XLII 

(15). 

Vyapagatakhiladosha,  N.  of  a  Tatha- 
gata, III  (58). 

Vyapagatakhilamalapratighosha,  N. 
of  a  Tathagata,  III  (25). 

vyapada,  malevolence,  X,  p.  25. 

5akra,  king  of  Devas,  XII,  p.  29  ; 
XX;   XXXII,  p.  54. 

5akratva,  X,  p.  27. 
Sakyamuni,  XXXIX,  p,  64. 
janta(prajantopajantam),         peace, 

XVIII,  p.  40  ;  jantasahagatam, 

ibid. 
Sariputra,  N.  pr.,  I  (15). 
5astr/  (samgHd.,  the  name  of)  Master, 

XLIII,  p.  72. 
jila  (paramita),  virtue,  X,  p.  26. 
jukladharma,  the  pure  Law,  X,  p.  25. 
S'uddhavasa,  XII,  p.  29. 
jiinyata,  emptiness,  X,p.  26;  XVIII, 

p.  40. 
5uraku/^a,  N.  of  a   Tathagata,    III 

(26). 
jraddha,  faith,  XXV,  5. 
5rama«a,  X,  p.  25. 
iSrantasaw/Jayendusurya^^ihmikarawa- 

prabha  =  Amitabha,  XII,  p.  29. 
jravaka,     pupil,     VIII,     12;     XI; 

XXXIV;  XXXIX,  p.63seq.; 

XLIV,  4,  5. 


5riku/a,  N.of  a  Tathagata,  III  (21) ; 

XLII  (10). 
jruta,  sacred  knowledge,  XXXVIII, 

p.  61. 
sreshtMn,  merchant,  X,  p.  27. 

Sangamaniyaprabha    =    Amitabha, 

XII,  p.  29. 
sangha,  the  Church,  XVIII,  p.  39. 
Sadivyamawiprabha     =     Amitabha, 

XII,  p.  29. 
sadevaka,   together  with   the  gods, 

X,  p.  25. 
saddharma,    the   good   Law,    VIII, 

8. 
Saptaratnabhivr/sh/a,  N.  of  a  Tatha- 
gata, III  (60). 
sabrahmaka,  together  with  Brahman, 

X,  p.  25. 
samantabhadra/iarya,Samantabhadra 

discipline,  VIII,  20. 
Samantanugata,  N.  of  a  Samadhi, 

VIII,  43- 
Samadhi,    ecstacy,    II,  p.  4 ;    VIII, 

40,  43;  XXVIII. 
samaraka,  together  with  Mara,  X, 

P-  25- 
samyaktva,  absolute  truth,  VIII,  11. 
samyaksambuddha,fully  enlightened, 

II,p.  4;  V;  XXVII;  XXVIIl; 

XXXII  beg.;  XXXIX. 
samyaksambodhi  (anuttara),  highest 

perfect    knowledge,    V;    VII; 

VIII  ;    X,  p.  26;    XI;    XIV; 

XXVI;      XXVII;      XXIX; 

XXXII,    p.    55;      XXXIII; 

XLIII,  p.  72;  XLV,  p.  76. 
samyaga^wa,  perfect  knowledge,  I. 
sarvakujalamulaparamita,  perfection 

of  all  stocks  of  merit,  XLIII, 

P-73. 
sarva_g^//a^«ana,    the    knowledge    of 

omniscience,  XLIII,  p.  72. 
sarva^wata,    omniscience,  II,   p.   3  ; 

VIII,  23;   XXXVIII  beg. 
sajramawabrahniawika,  together  with 

i'ramawas    and    Brahnians,    X, 

p.  25. 
Sahalokadhatu,     the     world    Saha, 

XXXIX,  p.  64. 
Sagarameru^andra,  N.  of  a  Tatha- 
gata, III  (41). 
SagaravarabuddhivikrWitabhi^wa,  N. 

of  a  Tathagata,  III  (22). 
Siwha,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III  (79)  ; 

XLII  (8,9). 


G  2 


84 


DESCRIPTION    OF    SUKHAVATt. 


simhannda,   the  lion's  voice,   VII  ; 

IX,  8. 
Siwhaniati,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(80). 
SiwhasagarakQ/avinanditara^a,  N.  of 

a  Tathagata,  HI  (40). 
Siikhavati,  I  ;    XI  ;    XV  ;    XVI II  ; 

XXXIX;   XL,  &c. 
Sugata,  the  sons  of  S.,  I,  p.  i  ;  III, 

p.  7  ;  XXXI,  21  (the  Sugatas) ; 

XLIV,  10. 
sutushitva,  X,  p.  27. 
Siiniiniitatva,  X,  p.  27. 
Subahu,  N.  pr.,  I  (8). 
SubhCiti,  N.  pr.,  I  (23). 
Sumcru,  XVII,  p.  37;    XXXVIII, 

p.  59,  pliir.  ;   XXXIX,  p.  63. 
Siimerukalpa,    N.   of  a   1  athagata, 

111(5). 


suyamatva,  X,  p.  27. 

sulikhita,  a  good  copy,  XLIII,  p.  72. 

Suvar«agarbha,  N.  of  a  Tathagata, 

111(67). 
Suvarwaprabha,  N.  of  a  Tathagata, 

111(14).^ 
Siivibhaktavati,  name  of  a  Samadhi, 

VIII,  40. 
Suryodana,  N.  of  a  Tathagata,  III 

(II). 
stryagara,  room  for  women  (Frauen- 

zimmer),  XLI,  p.  67. 
Sthavira,  elder,  I,  p.  2  (bis). 
Svagata,  N.  pr.,  I  (27). 
svadhyaya,  learning,  VIII,  28. 


hetubalika,     strong     in     argument, 
XXXVIII,  p.  61. 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


Bodhisattvas,  11 ;  VII  ;  VIII,  20. 
Bodhi-tree,  IV,  8;  VIII,  27. 
Brahma«as,  X,  p.  25. 
Buddha  country,  V  ;  VI  ;  VII,  &c. ; 

X,  p.25;  XI  ;  XII. 
Buddha,  the  Law  and  the  Church, 

VIII,  46. 
Buddhas,  X,  p.  26  end. 

—  possessed  of  thirty-two   marks, 

XVI,  p.  36. 

—  proceeding  from  the  rays  of  light 

that  proceed  from  gem-lotuses, 
XVI,  p.  36. 

—  XVII. 

—  praise  Amitabha,  XXVI. 
Buddha's  death,  XXVII;  XXVIII. 

—  son,  XXXI,  13. 

Endurance,  degrees  of,  VIII,  46. 

Gods,  X,  p.  25  ;  XL,  p.  65. 

—  (thirty-three),  XVII. 

—  Buddhas,  II. 

—  and  men,  VIII,  4,  30,  32,  35. 
no  difference  between  them, 

XX. 

Jewel-flowers,  VIII,  31. 
Jewel-trees,  VIII,  38. 


Knowledge,    six    kinds    of   (sha</a- 
bhi^wa),  I. 

—  highest    perfect    (samyaksambo- 

dhi),  V,  &c. 

—  perfect  (pratisawvit),  VIII,  28. 

—  three  kinds  of,  IX,  10. 

Lion  voice  (si/whanada),  IX,  8. 
Lotus,  men  living  in  lotus-flowers, 
XL,  p.  65. 

Meditation,  the  third,  VIII,  37. 
Music-clouds,  VIII,  31. 

Nirvawa,    IV,    8;    VIII,    20;    XI  ; 
XXI;  XXIV;  XLIV,  7. 

Off'erings,  IX,  i,  10. 

Powers  (ten),  IX,  i. 

Prayer,  IV,  10;  VI  ;  VIII,  14,  20. 

Salvation,  eight   kinds   of  (ash/avi- 

moksha),  I. 
Shower  of  flowers,  IX,  11. 

Women,  VIII,  34. 


THE    SMALLER 
SUKHAVATI-VYtJHA. 


THE     SMALLER 

S  U  K  H  AVAT  I-V  Y  U  H  A. 

Adoration  to  the  Omniscient  ! 

§  I.  Thus  it  was  heard  by  me  :  At  one  time  the 
Blessed  (Bhagavat,  i.e.  Buddha)  dwelt  at  ^'ravasti  \ 
in  the  (7eta-grove,  in  the  garden  of  Anathapi;^rt^aka, 
together  with  a  large  company  of  Bhikshus  (mendi- 
cant friars),  viz.  with  twelve  hundred  and  fifty 
Bhikshus,  all  of  them  acquainted  with  the  five  kinds 
of  knowledge  ^,  elders,  great  disciples  ^,  and  Arhats  *, 

^  .Sravasti,  capital  of  the  Northern  Kojalas,  residence  of  king 
Prasena^it.  It  was  in  ruins  when  visited  by  Fa-hian  (init.  V.  Saec.) ; 
not  far  from  the  modern  Fizabad.     Cf.  Burnouf,  Introduction,  p.  22. 

^  Abhi^wanabhi^watai//.  The  Japanese  text  reads  abhi- 
^«atabha^«atai^,  i.e.  abhi^«atabhi^«atai>^.  If  this  were 
known  to  be  the  correct  reading,  we  should  translate  it  by  '  known 
by  known  people,'  notus  a  viris  notis,  i.  e.  well  known,  famous. 
Abhi^wata  in  the  sense  of  known,  famous,  occurs  in  Lalita- 
vistara,  p.  25,  and  the  Chinese  translators  adopted  the  same  meaning 
here.  Again,  if  we  preferred  the  reading  abhi^;7anabhi^;7atai-^, 
this,  too,  would  admit  of  an  intelligible  rendering,  viz.  known  or 
distinguished  by  the  marks  or  characteristics,  i.  e.  the  good  quali- 
ties which  belong  to  a  Bhikshu.  But  the  technical  meaning  is 
'possessed  of  a  knowledge  of  the  five  abhi^was.'  It  would  be 
better  in  that  case  to  write  abhi^watabhi^wanai^,  but  no  MSS. 
seem  to  support  that  reading.  The  five  abhi^was  or  abhi^wanas 
which  an  Arhat  ought  to  possess  are  the  divine  sight,  the  divine 
hearing,  the  knowledge  of  the  thoughts  of  others,  the  remembrance 
of  former  existences,  and  magic  power.  See  Burnouf,  Lotus, 
Appendice,  No.  xiv.  The  larger  text  of  the  Sukhavatt-vyfiha  has 
'  *  See  next  page. 


90  THE    SMALLER    SUKIIAVATt-VYl)HA.  §  i. 

such  as  vSariputra,  the  elder,  Mahamaudgalydyana, 
Mahak^^yapa,  Mahakapphiwa,  Mahak^tydyana,  Ma- 
hakaush///ila,  Revata,  ^'uddhipanthaka,  Nanda, 
Ananda,  Rahiila,  Gavampati,  Bharadva^a,  Kalo- 
dayin,  Vakkula,  and  Aniruddha.  He  dwelt  together 
with  these  and  many  other  great  disciples,  and  to- 
gether with  many  noble-minded  Bodhisattvas,  such 
as  Ma/'^^'^u^ri,  the  prince,  the  Bodhisattva  A^ita,  the 
Bodhisattva  Gandhahastin,  the  Bodhisattva  Nityo- 
dyukta,  the  Bodhisattva  Anikshiptadhura.  He  dwelt 
together  widi  them  and  many  other  noble-minded 
Bodhisattvas,  and  with  ^'akra,  the  Indra  or  King^ 

abhi^«anabhi^«ai>^,  and  afterwards  abhi^«atabhi^«ai^.  The 
position  of  the  participle  as  the  uttara-pada  in  such  compounds  as 
abhi^/7anabhi^«atai/i  is  common  in  Buddhist  Sanskrit.  Mr. 
Bendall  has  called  my  attention  to  the  Pali  abhi/7//ata-abhi/7/)ata 
(Vinaya-piAika,  ed.  Oldenberg,  vol.  i,  p.  43),  which  favours  the 
Chinese  acceptation  of  the  term. 

'  Maha^ravaka,  the  great  disciples;  sometimes  the  eighty 
principal  disciples. 

*  ArhadbhiA.  I  have  left  the  correct  Sanskrit  form,  because 
the  Japanese  text  gives  the  termination  adbhi^.  Hogo's  text  has 
the  more  usual  form  arhantaiy^.  The  change  of  the  old  classical 
arhat  into  the  Pali  arahan,  and  then  back  into  Sanskrit  arhanta, 
arahanta,  and  at  last  arihanta,  with  the  meaning  of  '  destroyer 
of  the  enemies,'  i  e.  the  passions,  shows  very  clearly  the  different 
stages  through  which  Sanskrit  words  passed  in  the  different  phases 
of  Budiihist  literature.  In  Tibet,  in  Mongolia,  and  in  China,  Arhat 
is  translated  by  'destroyer  of  the  enemy,'  i.e.  ari-hanta.  See 
Burnouf,  Lotus,  p.  287,  Introduction,  p.  295.  Arhat  is  really  the 
title  of  the  Bhikshu  on  reaching  the  fourth  degree  of  perfection.  Cf. 
Siiira  of  the  42  Sections,  cap.  2.  Clemens  of  Alexandria  (d.  220) 
speaks  of  the  Sf/n/oi  who  worshipped  a  pyramid  erected  over  the 
relics  of  a  god.  This  may  be  a  translation  of  Arhat,  as  Lassen 
(•  Dc  nom.  Ind.  philosoph.'  in  Rhein.  Museum,  vol.  i,  p.  187)  and 
Burnouf  (Introduction,  p.  295)  supposed,  or  a  transliteration  of 
Samana.     Clemens  also  speaks  of  itfipai  (Stromat.  p.  539,  Potter). 

'  Indra,  the  old  Vedic  god,  has  come  to  mean  simply  lord,  and 


§3.  THE    SMALLER    SUKHAVATt-VYUHA.  9I 

of  the  Devas,  and  with  Brahman  Sahampati.  With 
these  and  many  other  hundred  thousand  nayutas  ^  of 
sons  of  the  gods,  Bhagavat  dwelt  at  6'ravasti. 

§  2.  Then  Bhagavat  addressed  the  honoured  San- 
putra  and  said,  '  O  ^Sariputra,  after  you  have  passed 
from  here  over  a  hundred  thousand  ko/is  of  Buddha 
countries  there  is  in  the  Western  part  a  Buddha 
country,  a  world  called  Sukhavati  (the  happy  coun- 
try). And  there  a  Tathagata,  called  Amitayus,  an 
Arhat,  fully  enlightened,  dwells  now,  and  remains, 
and  supports  himself,  and  teaches  the  Law  -. 

'  Now  what  do  you  think,  ^'ariputra,  for  what 
reason  is  that  world  called  Sukhavati  (the  happy)  ? 
In  that  world  Sukhavati,  O  ^'ariputra,  there  is  neither 
bodily  nor  mental  pain  for  living  beings.  The 
sources  of  happiness  are  innumerable  there.  For 
that  reason  is  that  world  called  Sukhavati  (the 
happy). 

f  3.  'And  again,  O  .Sariputra,  that  world  Sukhavati 
is  adorned  with  seven  terraces,  with  seven  rows  of 

in  the  -^anda  Paritta  (Journal  Asiatique,  1871,  p.  220)  we  actually 
find  Asurinda,  the  Indra  or  Lord  of  the  Asuras. 

^  The  numbers  in  Buddhist  literature,  if  they  once  exceed 
a  ko/i  or  ko/i,  i.  e.  ten  millions,  become  very  vague,  nor  is  their 
value  always  the  same.  Ayuta,  i.  e.  a  hundred  ko/is ;  niyuta,  i.e. 
a  hundred  ayutas  ;  and  nayuta,  i.e.  i  with  22  zeros,  are  often  con- 
founded ;  nor  does  it  matter  much  so  far  as  any  definite  idea  is 
concerned  which  such  numerals  convey  to  our  mind.  See  Prof. 
H.  Schubert,  'On  large  numbers,'  in  Open  Court,  Dec.  14,  1893. 

^  Tish///ati  dhriyate  yapayati  dharma;;;  X-a  dejayati.  This  is 
an  idiomatic  phrase,  which  occurs  again  and  again  in  the  Nepalese 
text  of  the  Sukhavati-vyfiha  (MS.  26  b,  11.  i,  2  ;  55  a,  1.  2,  &c.).  It 
seems  to  mean,  he  stands  there,  holds  himself,  supports  himself, 
and  teaches  the  law.  Burnouf  translates  the  same  phrase  by,  '  ils 
se  trouvent,  vivent,  existent'  (Lotus,  p.  354).  On  yapeti  in  Pali, 
see  Fausboll,  Dasaratha-^taka,  pp.  26,  28  ;  and  yapana  in  Sanskrit. 


92  THE   SMALLER    SUKIIAVAtJ-V^OhA.  §3. 

palm-trees,  and  with  strings  of  bells  \  It  is  enclosed 
on  every  side  -,  beautiful,  brilliant  with  the  four 
gems,  viz.  gold,  silver,  beryl,  and   crystal  ^.     With 

'  Kihkiwi^ala,  The  texts  read  kahka«a^alai^  kz.  and 
kahkawi^alais  ^a,  and  again  later  kahkawi^alunam  (also  IQ) 
and  kahkawi^alanam,  Mr.  Beal  translates  from  Chinese  'seven 
rows  of  exquisite  curtains,'  and  again  '  gemmous  curtains.'  First 
of  all,  it  seems  clear  that  we  must  read  ^ala,  net,  web,  instead  of 
^ala.  Secondly,  kahkawa,  bracelet,  gives  no  sense,  for  what 
could  be  the  meaning  of  nets  or  strings  of  bracelets .-'  I  prefer 
to  read  kihkiwi^ala,  nets  or  strings  or  rows  of  bells.  Such  rows 
of  bells  served  for  ornamenting  a  garden,  and  it  may  be  said  of 
them  that,  if  moved  by  the  wind,  they  give  forth  certain  sounds. 
In  the  commentary  on  Dhammapada  30,  p.  191,  we  meet  with 
kihkinika^ala,  from  which  likewise  the  music  proceeds;  see 
Childers,  s.v.  ^ala.  In  the  I\ISS.  of  the  Nepalese  Sukhavati-vyfiha 
(R.A.S.),  p.  39  a,  1.  4,  I  likewise  find  svarwaratnakinkiwi^alani, 
which  settles  the  matter,  and  shows  how  little  confidence  we  can 
place  in  the  Japanese  texts. 

*  Anuparikshipta,  enclosed;  see  parikkhej^o  in  Childers' 
Dictionary,  and  compare  pairidaSza,  paradise. 

'  The  four  and  seven  precious  things  in  Pali  are  (according  to 
Childers) : — 

1.  suva;/;/aw,  gold. 

2.  ra^j^ataw,  silver. 

3.  multa,  pearls. 

4.  ma//i,  gems  (as  sapphire,  ruby). 

5.  ve/uriyaw,  cat's  eye. 

6.  va^iraw,  diamond. 

7.  pava/am,  coral. 

Here  Childers  translates  cat's  eye;  but  s.v.  ve/uriyam,  he  says, 
a  precious  stone,  perhaps  lapis  lazuli. 
In  Sanskrit  (Burnouf,  Lotus,  p.  320): — 


I. 

suvarwa. 

gold. 

2. 

rOpya, 

silver. 

3- 

vai</flrya, 

lapis  lazuli. 

4- 

spha/ika. 

crystal. 

R- 

lohilamukti, 

red  }x;arls. 

6. 

a.rmagarbha. 

diamond. 

7 

musAragalva, 

coral. 

§4.  THE    SMALLER    SUKIIAVATI-VyOhA.  93 

such    arrays   of  excellences    peculiar    to   a    Buddha 
country  is  that  Buddha  country  adorned. 

§4.  'And  again,  O  ^'ariputra,  in  that  world  Sukha- 
vati  there  are  lotus  lakes,  adorned  with  the  seven 
gems,  viz,  gold,  silver,  beryl,  crystal,  red  pearls,  dia- 
monds, and  corals  as  the  seventh.  They  are  full  of 
water  which  possesses  the  eight  good  qualities \  their 
waters  rise  as  high  as  the  fords  and  bathing-places, 
so    that   even   crows  ^  may  drink    there ;    they  are 

Julien  (Pelerins  Buddhistes,  vol.  ii,  p.  482)  gives  the  following 
list  :— 

1.  spha/ika,  rock  crystal. 

2.  vaidGrya,  lapis  lazuli. 

3.  ajmagarbha,  cornaline. 

4.  musaragalva,  amber. 

5.  padmaraga,  ruby. 

Vaifi^Clrya  (or  Vaidfirya)  is  mentioned  in  the  Tathagataguwa- 
^wana/i'intyavishayavataranirde.ya  (Wassilief,  p.  161)  as  a  precious 
stone  ^vhich,  if  placed  on  green  cloth,  looks  green,  if  placed  on  red 
cloth,  red.  The  fact  that  va.id\lvya.  is  often  compared  with  the 
colour  of  the  eyes  of  a  cat  would  seem  to  point  to  the  cat's  eye  (see 
Borooah's  Engl.-Sanskrit  Dictionary,  vol.  ii,  preface,  p.  ix),  certainly 
not  to  lapis  lazuli.  Cat's  eye  is  a  kind  of  chalcedony.  I  see,  how- 
ever, that  vaiffurya  has  been  recognised  as  the  original  of  the 
Greek  ^ijpvXXos-,  a  very  ingenious  conjecture,  either  of  Weber's  or 
of  Pott's,  considering  that  lingual  d  has  a  sound  akin  to  r,  and  ry 
may  be  changed  to  ly  and  11  (Weber,  Omina,  p.  326).  The  Persian 
billaur  or  ballur,  which  Skeat  gives  as  the  etymon  of  jSijpv'Wos, 
is  of  Arabic  origin,  means  crystal,  and  could  hardly  have  found 
its  way  into  Greek  at  so  early  a  time.  See  '  India,  what  can  it 
teach  us? '  p.  267. 

*  The  eight  good  qualities  of  water  are  limpidity  and  purity, 
refreshing  coolness,  sweetness,  softness,  fertilising  qualities,  calm- 
ness, power  of  preventing  famine,  productiveness.  See  Beal, 
Catena,  p.  379. 

2  Kakapeya.  One  text  reads  kakapeya,  the  other  kaka- 
peya.  It  is  difficult  to  choose.  The  more  usual  word  is 
kakapeya,  which  is  explained  by  Pawini,  II,  i,  33.  It  is  uncer- 
tain, however,  whether  kakapeya  is  meant  as  a  laudatory  or  as 


94  THE   SMALLER    SUKnAvATi-VvOHA.  §4. 

Strewn  with  golden  sand.  And  in  these  lotus-lakes 
there  are  all  around  on  the  four  sides  four  stairs, 
beautiful  and  brilliant  with  the  four  gems,  viz.  gold, 
silver,  beryl,  crystal.  And  on  every  side  of  these 
lotus-lakes  gem- trees  are  growing,  beautiful  and 
brilliant  with  the  seven  gems,  viz.  gold,  silver,  beryl, 
crystal,  red  pearls,  diamonds,  and  corals  as  the 
seventh.  And  in  those  lotus-lakes  lotus-flowers  are 
growing,  blue,  blue-coloured,  of  blue  splendour,  blue 
to  behold ;  yellow,  yellow-coloured,  of  yellow  splen- 
dour, yellow  to  behold  ;  red,  red-coloured,  of  red 
splendour,  red  to  behold ;  white,  white-coloured,  of 
white  splendour,  white  to  behold  ;  beautiful,  beau- 
tifully-coloured, of  beautiful  splendour,  beautiful  to 
behold,  and  in  circumference  as  large  as  the  wheel 
of  a  chariot. 

a  depreciatory  term.  Bohtlingk  lakes  it  in  the  latter  sense,  and 
translates  nadi  kakapeya,  by  a  shallow  riverthat  could  be  drunk 
up  by  a  crow.  Taranatha  takes  it  in  the  former  sense,  and  trans- 
lates nadi  kakapeya,  as  a  river  so  full  of  water  that  a  crow  can 
drink  it  without  bending  its  neck  (kakair  anatakandharai/;  piyate  ; 
pQrwodakatvena  prajasye  kakai^  peye  nadyadau).  In  our  passage 
kakapeya  must  be  a  term  of  praise,  and  we  therefore  could  only 
render  it  by  '  ponds  so  full  of  water  that  crows  could  drink  from 
them.'  But  why  should  so  well  known  a  word  as  kakapeya  have 
been  spelt  kakapeya,  unless  it  was  done  intentionally?  And 
if  intentionally,  what  was  it  intended  for?  We  must  remember 
that  Tawini,  II,  i,  42  schol.,  teaches  us  how  to  form  the  word 
tirthakdka,  a  crow  at  a  lirtha,  which  means  a  person  in  a  wrong 
place.  It  would  seem  therefore  thai  crows  were  considered 
out  of  place  at  a  lirtha  or  baihing-place,  either  because  they 
were  birds  of  ill  omen,  or  because  they  defiled  the  water.  From 
that  point  of  view,  kakapeya  would  mean  a  pond  not  visiied 
by  crows,  free  from  crows.  Professor  Pischel  has  called  my  atlcn- 
lion  to  Mahapariuibbana  Sulla  (J.  R.  A.  S.  1875,  p.  67,  p.  21), 
where  kakapeya  clearly  refers  to  a  full  river.  Samali////ika,  if 
this  is  the  right  reading,  occurs  in  the  same  place  as  an  epiihel  of 


§6.  THE    SMALLER    SUKHAVATI-VyOhA.  95 

§5.  'And again, O  KSariputra,  in  that  Buddha  country 
there  are  heavenly  musical  instruments  always  played 
on,  and  the  earth  is  lovely  and  of  golden  colour. 
And  in  that  Buddha  country  a  flower- rain  of  heavenly 
Mandarava  blossoms  pours  down  three  times  every 
day,  and  three  times  every  night.  And  the  beings 
who  are  born  there  worship  before  their  morning 
meal  ^  a  hundred  thousand  ko/is  of  Buddhas  by 
going  to  other  worlds ;  and  having  showered  a  hun- 
dred thousand  ko/is  of  flowers  upon  each  Tatha- 
gata,  they  return  to  their  own  world  in  time  for  the 
afternoon  rest  ^.  With  such  arrays  of  excellences 
peculiar  to  a  Buddha  country  is  that  Buddha  country 
adorned. 

§6.  'And  again,  O  ^'ariputra,  there  are  in  that  Bud- 
dha country  swans,  curlews  ^  and  peacocks.  Three 
times  every  night,  and  three  times  every  day,  they 

a  river,  by  the  side  of  kakapeya,  and  I  think  it  most  likely  that  it 
means  rising  to  a  level  with  the  tirthas,  the  fords  or  bathing-places. 
Mr.  Rhys  Davids  informs  me  that  the  commentary  explains  the  two 
words  by  samatittika  ti  samahariia,  kakapeyya  ti  yatthatattha/ti  lire 
//ntena  kakena  sakka  patum  ti. 

^  Purobhaktena.  The  text  is  difficult  to  read,  but  it  can 
hardly  be  doubtful  that  purobhaktena  corresponds  to  Pali 
purebhattaw  (i.e.  before  the  morning  meal),  opposed  to  pa^- 
kk3.hh^tt3.m,  after  the  noonday  meal  (i.e.  in  the  afternoon).  See 
Childers,  s.v.  Purvabhaktika  would  be  the  first  repast,  as  Prof. 
Cowell  informs  me. 

2  Divaviharaya,  for  the  noonday  rest,  the  siesta.  See  Childers, 
s.v.  vihara. 

3  Krau«^'a>^.  Snipe,  curlew.  Is  it  meant  for  Kuravika,  or 
Karavika,  a  fine-voiced  bird  (according  to  Kern,  the  Sk.  kara- 
yika),  or  for  Kalavihka,  Pali  Kalavika?  See  Childers,  s.v. 
opapatiko;  Burnouf,  Lotus,  p.  566.  I  see,  however,  the  same 
birds  mentioned  together  elsewhere,  as  ha;«sakrau/7X'amayurajuka- 
jalikakokila,  &c.  On  mayftra  see  Mahav.,  Inlrod.  p.  xxxix ;  Rv.  I, 
191,  14. 


96  THE    SMALLER    SUKHAVAtJ-VyOhA.  §6. 

come  together  and  perform  a  concert,  each  uttering  his 
own  note.  And  froni  them  thus  uttering  proceeds 
a  sound  proclaiming  the  five  virtues,  the  five  powers, 
and  the  seven  steps  leading  towards  the  highest 
knowledge  \  When  the  men  there  hear  that  sound, 
remembrance  of  Buddha,  remembrance  of  the  Law, 
remembrance  of  the  Church,  rises  in  their  mind. 

'  Now,  do  you  think,  O  ^'ariputra,  that  there  are 
beings  who  have  entered  into  the  nature  of  animals 
(birds,  &c.)  ?     This  is  not  to  be  thought  of.     The 

*  Indriyabalabodhyahgajabda.  These  are  technical  terms,  but 
their  meaning  is  not  quite  clear.  Spence  Hardy,  in  his  Manual, 
p.  498,  enumerates  the  five  indrayas,  viz.  (i)  sardhawa,  purity 
(probably  jraddha,  faith);  (2)  wiraya,  persevering  exertion 
(vtrya);  (3)  sati  or  smirti,  the  ascertainment  of  truth  (smr/ti); 
(4)  samadhi,  tranquillity;  (5)  pragnava,  wisdom  (pra^wa). 

The  five  balayas  (bala),  he  adds,  are  the  same  as  the  five 
indrayas. 

The  seven  bowdyanga  (bodhyahga)  are  according  to  him  : 
(i)  sihi  or  smirti,  the  ascertainment  of  the  truth  by  mental 
application;  (2)  dharmmawicha,  the  investigation  of  causes; 
(3)  wiraya,  persevering  exertion;  (4)  priti,  joy;  (5)  passadhi, 
or  prasrabdhi,  tranquillity ;  (6)  samadhi,  tranquillity  in  a  higher 
degree,  including  freedom  from  all  that  disturbs  either  body  or 
mind;  (7)  upckslia,  equanimity. 

It  will  be  seen  from  this  that  some  of  these  qualities  or  excel- 
lences occur  both  as  indriyas  and  bodhyahgas,  while  balas  are 
throughout  identical  with  indriyas. 

Burnouf,  however,  in  his  Lotus,  gives  a  list  of  five  balas  (from 
the  Vocabulaire  Pentaglolte)  which  correspond  with  the  five  indriyas 
of  Spence  Hardy;  viz.  jraddha-bala,  power  of  faith;  virya- 
bala,  power  of  vigour;  smr/ti-bala,  power  of  memory ;  saniadhi- 
bala,  power  of  meditation;  pra,^«a-bala,  power  of  knowledge. 
They  precede  the  seven  bodhyangas  both  in  the  Lotus,  the 
Vocabulaire  Pentaglotte,  and  the  Lalita-vistara. 

To  these  seven  bodhyangas  Ikirnouf  has  assigned  a  special 
treatise  (Appendice  xii,  p.  796).  They  occur  both  in  Sanskrit 
and  Pali.  Sec  also  Dharmasahgraha  s.  v.  in  the  Anecdola 
Oxonicnsia. 


§9-  THE    SMALLER    SUKHAVAT{-VyOhA.  97 


very  name  of  hells  is  unknown  in  that  Buddha 
country,  and  likewise  that  of  (descent  into)  animal 
bodies  and  of  the  realm  ofYama  (the  four  apayas)\ 
No,  these  tribes  of  birds  have  been  made  on  purpose 
by  the  Tathagata  Amitayus,  and  they  utter  the  sound 
of  the  Law.     With  such  arrays  of  excellences,  &c. 

§  7.  'And  again,  O  6'ariputra,  when  those  rows  of 
palm-trees  and  strings  of  bells  in  that  Buddha  country 
are  moved  by  the  wind,  a  sweet  and  enrapturing  sound 
proceeds  from  them.  Yes,  O  vS'ariputra,  as  from  a 
heavenly  musical  instrument  consisting  of  a  hundred 
thousand  ko/is  of  sounds,  when  played  by  Aryas, 
a  sweet  and  enrapturing  sound  proceeds,  a  sweet 
and  enrapturing  sound  proceeds  from  those  rows  of 
palm-trees  and  strings  of  bells  moved  by  the  wind. 
And  when  the  men  hear  that  sound,  reflection  on 
Buddha  arises  in  them,  reflection  on  the  Law, 
reflection  on  the  Church.  With  such  arrays  of 
excellences,  &c. 

§  8.  '  Now  what  do  you  think,  O  vSariputra,  for  what 
reason  is  that  Tathagata  called  Amitayus  ?  The 
length  of  life  (ayus),  O  KS'ariputra,  of  that  Tathagata 
and  of  those  men  there  is  immeasurable  (amita). 
Therefore  is  that  Tathagata  called  Amitayus.  And 
ten  kalpas  have  passed,  O  ^Sariputra,  since  that 
Tathagata  awoke  to  perfect  knowledge. 

§  9.  'And  what  do  you  think,  O  ^'ariputra,  for  what 
reason  is  that  Tathagata   called   Amitabha  ?     The 

^  Niraya,  the  hells,  also  called  Naraka.  Yamaloka,  the  realm  of 
Yama,  the  judge  of  the  dead,  is  explained  as  the  four  apayas,  i.e. 
Naraka,  hell ;  Tiryagyoni,  birth  as  animals ;  Pretaloka,  realm  of  the 
departed ;  Asuraloka,  realm  of  evil  spirits.  The  three  terms  which 
are  here  used  together  occur  likewise  in  a  passage  translated  by 
Burnouf,  Introduction,  p.  544. 

[49]  ''■  H 


98  THE    SMALLER    SUKHAVATJ-V\OhA.  §  lO. 

splendour  (^bhd).  O  KSariputra,  of  that  Tathagata  is 
unimpeded  over  all  Buddha  countries.  Therefore  is 
that  Tathagata  called  Amitabha. 

'And  there  is,  O  ^S'ariputra,  an  innumerable  as- 
sembly of  disciples  with  that  Tathagata,  purified  and 
venerable  persons,  whose  number  it  is  not  easy  to 
count.     With  such  arrays  of  excellences,  See. 

J  lo.  'And  again,  O  ^S'ariputra,  of  those  beings  also 
who  are  born  in  the  Buddha  country  of  the  Tathagata 
Amitiyus  as  purified  Bodhisattvas,  never  to  return 
again  and  bound  by  one  birth  only,  of  those  Bodhisat- 
tvas also,  O  ^'ariputra,  the  number  is  not  easy  to  count, 
except  they  are  reckoned  as  infinite  in  number  \ 

'  Then  again  all  beings,  O  6'ariputra,  ought  to 
make  fervent  prayer  for  that  Buddha  country.  And 
why  ?  Because  they  come  together  there  with  such 
excellent  men.  Beinq-s  are  not  born  in  that  Buddha 
country  of  the  Tathagata  Amitayus  as  a  reward  and 
result  of  good  works  performed  in  this  present  life  -. 

'  Iti  sankhyS/w  ga^^^anti,  they  are  called;  cf.  Childers,  s.v. 
sahkhya.  Asahkhyeya,  even  more  than  aprameya,  is  the 
recognised  term  for  infinity.     Burnoiif,  Lotus,  p.  852. 

^  Avaramatraka.  This  is  the  Pali  oramattako,  'belonging 
merely  to  the  present  life,'  and  the  intention  of  the  writer  seems  to 
be  to  inculcate  the  doctrine,  that  salvation  can  be  obtained  by  mere 
repetitions  of  the  name  of  Amitabha,  in  direct  opposition  to  the 
original  doctrine  of  Buddha,  that  as  a  man  soweth,  so  he  reapeth. 
Buddha  would  have  taught  that  the  ku^alamtila,  the  root  or  the 
stock  of  good  works  performed  in  this  world  (avaramatraka), 
will  bear  fruit  in  the  ne.xt,  while  here  'vain  repetitions'  seem  all 
that  is  enjoyed.  The  Chinese  translators  take  a  different  view  of 
this  passage.  But  from  the  end  of  this  section,  where  we  read 
kulaputrena  va  kuladuhitra  va  tatra  buddhakshetre  X'ittapra;/idhana»z 
kariavyam,  it  seems  clear  that  the  locative  (buddhakshetre) 
forms  the  object  of  the  pra«idh.ina,  the  fervent  prayer  or  longing. 
Tlie  Satpuruslias  already  in  the  Buddhakshetra  would  be  the  innu- 
merable men  (manushyds)  and  Bodhisattvas  mentioned  before. 


§  ir.  THE    SMALLER    SUKHAVATi-VYOnA.  99 

No,  whatever  son  or  daughter  of  a  family  shall  hear 
the  name  of  the  blessed  Amitayus,  the  Tathagata, 
and  having  heard  It,  shall  keep  It  In  mind,  and  with 
thoughts  undisturbed  shall  keep  It  In  mind  for 
one,  two,  three,  four,  five,  six  or  seven  nights, — when 
that  son  or  daughter  of  a  family  comes  to  die,  then 
that  Amitayus,  the  Tathagata,  surrounded  by  an 
assembly  of  disciples  and  followed  by  a  host  of  Bodhi- 
sattvas,  will  stand  before  them  at  their  hour  of  death, 
and  they  will  depart  this  life  with  tranquil  minds. 
After  their  death  they  will  be  born  In  the  world 
Sukhavati,  In  the  Buddha  country  of  the  same 
Amitayus,  the  Tathagata.  Therefore,  then,  O  SAn- 
putra,  having  perceived  this  cause  and  effect  \  I  with 
reverence  say  thus.  Every  son  and  every  daughter  of 
a  family  ought  with  their  whole  mind  to  make  fervent 
prayer  for  that  Buddha  country, 

J  II.  'And  now,  O  .Sdriputra,  as  I  here  at  present 
glorify  that  world,  thus  In  the  East,  O  6ariputra,  other 
blessed  Buddhas,  led  by  the  Tathagata  Akshobhya, 
the  Tathagata  Merudhva^a,  the  Tathagata  Maha- 
meru,  the  Tathagata  Meruprabhasa,  and  the  Tatha- 
gata Ma^'^^udhva^a,  equal  In  number  to  the  sand 
of  the  river  Gaiiga,  comprehend  their  own  Buddha 
countries  in  their  speech,  and  then  reveal  them  2. 

'  Arthavaja,  lit.  the  power  of  the  thing;  of.  Dhammapada, 
p.  388,  V.  289. 

^  I  am  not  quite  certain  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  passage,  but  if 
we  enter  into  the  bold  metaphor  of  the  text,  viz.  that  the  Buddhas 
cover  the  Buddha  countries  with  the  organ  of  their  tongue  and  then 
unrol  it,  what  is  intended  can  hardly  be  anything  but  that  they  first 
try  to  find  words  for  the  excellences  of  those  countries,  and  then 
reveal  or  proclaim  them.  Burnouf,  however  (Lotus,  p.  417),  takes  the 
expression  in  a  literal  sense,  though  he  is  shocked  by  itsgrotcsqueness. 
On  these  Buddhas  and  their  countries,  see  Burnouf,  Lotus,  p.  113. 

*  H  2 


lOO  THE   SMALLER    SUKHAVATi-VYUHA.  §  12. 

Accept  this  repetition  of  the  Law,  called  the  "  Favour 
of  all  Buddhas,"  which  magnifies  their  inconceivable 
excellences. 

^12.'  Thus  also  in  the  South  do  other  blessed  Bud- 
dhas, led  by  the  Tathagata  A'andrasuryapradipa,  the 
Tathagata  Ya^a/zprabha,  the  Tathagata  Mahar>{'i- 
skandha,  the  Tathagata  Merupradipa,  the  Tathagata 
Anantavirya.  equal  in  number  to  the  sand  of  the  river 
Ganga,  comprehend  their  own  Buddha  countries  in 
their  speech,  and  then  reveal  them.     Accept,  &c. 

J  13. '  Thus  also  in  the  West  do  other  blessed  Bud- 
dhas, led  by  the  Tathagata  Amitayus,  the  Tathagata 
Amitaskandha,  the  Tathagata  Amitadhva.i;a,  the  Ta- 
thagata Mahaprabha,  the  Tathagata  Maharatnaketu, 
the  Tathagata  vyuddhara^miprabha,  equal  in  number 
to  the  sand  of  the  river  Ganga,  comprehend,  &c. 

§  14.  '  Thus  also  in  the  North  do  other  blessed  Bud- 
dhas, led  by  the  Tathagata  Mahar/'iskandha,  the 
Tathagata  Vaii"vanaranirghosha,  the  Tathagata  Dun- 
dubhisvaranirghosha,  the  Tathagata  Dushpradharsha, 
the  Tathagata  Adityasambhava, the  Tathagata  Caleni- 
prabha((7valanaprabha  ?),  the  Tathagata  Prabhakara, 
equal  in  number  to  the  sand,  &c. 

§  1$.  'Thus  also  in  the  Nadir  do  other  blessed 
Buddhas,  led  by  the  Tathagata  Siwha,  the  Tathagata 
Ya^as,  the  Tathagata  Ya.s"a//prabhava,  the  Tathagata 
Dharma,  theTathagata  Dliarmadhara,  the  Tathagata 
Dharmadhva^a,  equal  in  number  to  the  sand,  &c. 

§  16.  'Thus  also  in  the  Zenith  do  other  blessed 
Buddhas,  led  by  the  Tathagata  Brahmaghosha,  the 
Tathagata  Nakshatrara<^a,  the  Tathagata  Indraketu- 
dhvar^arA^a,  the  Tathagata  Ganclhottama,  the  Tatha- 
gata Gandhaprabhasa,  the  Tathdgata  Mahar/'iskan- 
dha,  ihc  Tathagata  Ratnakusumasampushpitagatra, 


§17-  THE    SMALLER    SUKHAVATi-VvOHA.  lOI 

the  Tathagata  Salendrara^a,  the  Tathagata  Ratiiot- 
palam,  the  Tathagata  Sarvarthadar^a,  the  Tathagata 
Siimerukalpa,  equal  in  number  to  the  sand,  &c.  ^ 

^17.'  Now  what  do  you  think,  O  .S'ariputra,  for  what 
reason  is  that  repetition  (treatise)  of  the  Law  called 
the  Favour  of  all  Buddhas  ?  Every  son  or  daughter 
of  a  family  who  shall  hear  the  name  of  that  repetition 
of  the  Law  and  retain  in  their  memory  the  names  of 
those  blessed  Buddhas,  will  be  favoured  by  the 
Buddhas,  and  will  never  return  again,  being  once 
in  possession  of  the  transcendent  true  knowledge. 
Therefore,  then,  O  KS'ariputra,  believe  ^,  accept,  and 
do  not  doubt  of  me  and  those  blessed  Buddhas ! 

'Whatever  sons  or  daughters  of  a  family  shall 
make  mental  prayer  for  the  Buddha  country  of  that 
blessed  Amitayus,  the  Tathagata,  or  are  making  it 
now  or  have  made  it  formerly,  all  these  will  never 
return  again,  being  once  in  possession  of  the  tran- 
scendent true  knowledge.  They  will  be  born  in  that 
Buddha  country,  have  been  born,  or  are  being  born 

^  It  should  be  remarked  that  the  Tathagatas  here  assigned  to  the 
ten  quarters  differ  entirely  from  those  assigned  to  them  in  the 
Lalita-vistara,  Book  XX.    Not  even  Amitabha  is  mentioned  there. 

^  Pratiyatha.  The  texts  give  again  and  again  pattiyatha, 
evidently  the  Pali  form,  instead  of  pratiyata.  I  have  left  tha,  the 
Pali  termination  of  the  2  p.  pi.  in  the  imperative,  instead  of  ta, 
because  that  form  was  clearly  intended,  while  pa  for  pra  may  be 
an  accident.  Yet  I  have  little  doubt  that  patiyatha  was  in  the 
original  text.  That  it  is  meant  for  the  imperative,  we  see  from 
j-raddadhadhvam,  &c.,  further  on.  Other  traces  of  the  influence 
of  Pali  or  Prakrit  on  the  Sanskrit  of  our  Sutra  appear  in  arhan- 
taij^,  the  various  reading  for  arhadbhi/z,  which  I  preferred; 
sambahula  for  bahula;  dhriyate  yapayati;  purobhaktena; 
anyatra;  sahkhyam  gaki'/innti;  avaramatraka;  ve//^ana 
instead  of  vesh/ana,  in  nirveMana;  dharmaparydya  (Corp. 
Inscript.  plate  xv),  &c. 


I02  THE    SMALLER    SUKHAVATt-VYtjHA.  §  i8. 

now.  Therefore,  then,  O  5^riputra,  mental  prayer 
is  to  be  made  for  that  Buddha  country  by  faithful 
sons  and  daughters  of  a  family. 

§  18.  'And  as  I  at  present  magnify  here  the  incon- 
ceivable excellences  of  those  blessed  Buddhas,  thus, 
O  ^'ariputra,  do  those  blessed  Buddhas  magnify  my 
own  inconceivable  excellences. 

'A  very  difficult  work  has  been  done  by  ^'akya- 
muni,  the  sovereign  of  the  ^'akyas.  Having  ob- 
tained the  transcendent  true  knowledge  in  this  world 
Saha,  he  tauofht  the  Law  which  all  the  world  is 
reluctant  to  accept,  during  this  corruption  of  the 
present  kalpa,  during  this  corruption  of  mankind, 
during  this  corruption  of  belief,  during  this  corrup- 
tion of  life,  during  this  corruption  of  passions. 

§  19.  'This  is  even  for  me,0  6'ariputra,an  extremely 
difficult  work  that,  having  obtained  the  transcendent 
true  knowledge  in  this  world  Saha,  I  taught  the  Law 
which  all  the  world  is  reluctant  to  accept,  during 
this  corruption  of  mankind,  of  belief,  of  passion,  of 
life,  and  of  this  present  kalpa.' 

§  20.  Thus  spoke  Bhagavat  joyful  in  his  mind. 
And  the  honourable  6'ariputra,  and  the  Bhikshus  and 
Bodhisattvas,  and  the  whole  world  with  the  gods, 
men,  evil  spirits  and  genii,  applauded  the  speech  of 
Bhagfavat. 

This  is  the  Mahay^nasiitra  ' 
called  Sukhavati-vyOha. 

*  The  Sukhavali-vyflha,  even  in  its  shortest  text,  is  called  a 
Mahayana-sOtra,  nor  is  there  any  reason  why  a  Mahayana-sQtra 
should  not  be  short.  The  meaning  of  Mahavana-sfltra  is  simply 
a  SCitra  belonging  to  the  Mahayana  school,  the  school  of  the  Great 
Boat.  It  was  Burnouf  who,  in  his  Introduction  to  the  History  of 
Buddhism,  tried  very  hard  to  establish  a  distinction  between  the 


§  20.  THE    SMALLER    SUKIIAVATI-VvOnA.  IO3 

Vaipulya  or  developed  Sutras,  and  what  he  calls  the  simple  Sutras. 
Now,  the  Vaipulya  Sutras  may  all  belong  to  the  INIahayana  school, 
but  that  would  not  prove  that  all  the  Sutras  of  the  INIahayana  school 
are  Vaipulya  or  developed  Sutras.  The  name  of  simple  Sutra,  in  op- 
position to  the  Vaipulya  or  developed  Sutras,  is  not  recognised  by  the 
Buddhists  themselves ;  at  least,  I  know  no  name  for  simple  Sutras. 
No  doubt  there  is  a  great  difference  between  a  Vaipulya  Sfltra,  such 
as  the  Lotus  of  the  Good  Law,  translated  by  Burnouf,  and  the  Sutras 
which  Burnouf  translated,  for  instance,  from  the  Divyavadana.  But 
what  Burnouf  considers  as  the  distinguishing  mark  of  a  Vaipulya 
Sutra,  viz.  the  occurrence  of  Bodhisattvas,  as  followers  of  the  Buddha 
6'akyamuni,  would  no  longer  seem  to  be  tenable  *,  unless  we  classed 
our  short  Sukhavati-vyuha  as  a  Vaipulya  or  developed  Siatra.  For 
this  there  is  no  authority.  Our  Sutra  is  a  Mahayana  Sutra,  but  never 
called  a  Vaipulya  SQtra,  and  yet  in  this  Sutra  the  Bodhisattvas  con- 
stitute a  very  considerable  portion  among  the  followers  of  Buddha. 
But  more  than  that,  Amitabha,  the  Buddha  of  Sukhavati,  another 
personage  whom  Burnouf  looks  upon  as  peculiar  to  the  Vaipulya 
Sutras,  who  is,  in  fact,  one  of  the  Dhyani-buddhas,  though  not 
called  by  that  name  in  our  Sutra,  forms  the  chief  object  of  its 
teaching,  and  is  represented  as  known  to  Buddha  ^"akyamuni,  nay, 
as  having  become  a  Buddha  long  before  the  Buddha  vSakyamuni  t- 
The  larger  text  of  the  Sukhavati-vyuha  would  certainly,  according 
to  Burnouf's  definition,  seem  to  fall  into  the  category  of  the 
Vaipulya  Sutras.  But  it  is  not  so  called  in  the  MSS.  which  I  have 
seen,  and  Burnouf  himself  gives  an  analysis  of  that  Stitra  (Intro- 
duction, p.  99)  as  a  specimen  of  a  Mahayana,  but  not  of  a 
Vaipulya  Sutra. 

*  '  La  presence  des  Bodhisattvas  ou  leur  absence  interesse  done  le  fonds  meme 
des  livres  ou  on  la  remarque,  et  il  est  bien  evident  que  ce  soul  point  trace  une 
ligne  de  demarcation  profonde  entre  les  Sutras  ordinaires  et  les  Sutras  de- 
veloppes.' — Burnouf,  Introduction,  p.  112. 

t  '  L'idee  d'un  ou  de  plusieurs  Buddhas  surhumains,  celle  de  Bodhisattvas 
crees  par  eux,  sont  des  conceptions  aussi  etrangeres  a  ces  hvrcs  (les  Sutras 
simples)  que  celle  d'un  Adibuddha  ou  d'un  Dieu.' — Burnouf,  Introduction, 
p.  120. 


INDEX  OF  NAMES  AND  SUBJECTS 

IN  THE  SMALLER  SUKHAVATI-VYUHA. 


Adityasambhava,     the     Tathagata, 

page  loo. 
A^ita,  the  Bodhisattva,  90. 
Akshobhya,  the  Tathagata,  99. 
Amitabha,  the  Tathagata,  97  seq. ; 

103. 
Amitadhva^a,  the  Tathagata,  100. 
Amitaskandha,  the  Tathagata,  100. 
Amitayus,  the    Tathagata,    91;    97 

seqq. ;  100  seq.;   repetition  of 

the  name  of  A.,  98  seq. 
Ananda,  90. 

Anantavirya,  the  Tathagata,  100. 
AnathapiWaka,  89. 
Anikshiptadhura,    the    Bodhisattva, 

90. 
Animal  bodies,  descent  into,  96  seq. 
Aniruddha,  90. 
Arhat,  89,  see  note  4  ;  91. 

Bharadva^a,  90. 

Bhikshus,  89  ;  102. 

Bodhisattvas,    90  ;    98  ;    99  ;    102  ; 

103. 
Brahmaghosha,  the  Tathagata,   100. 
Brahman  Sahampati,  91. 
Buddha  countries,  91  seqq. 
Buddhas,   95  ;    99  seqq. ;    Buddha, 

the  Law,  the  Church,  96;  97  ; 

'Favour  of  all  Buddhas,'  100; 

lOI. 

Burnouf,   on  the  Mahayana-sutras, 
102  seq. 

Cause  and  effect  (arthavaja),  99. 

Devas,  king  of  the,  91. 
Dharma,  the  Tathagata,  100. 
Dharmadhara,  the  Tathagata,  100. 
Dharmadhva^a,  the  Tathagata,  100. 
Dhyani-buddhas,  103. 


Dundubhisvaranirghosha,  the  Tatha- 
gata, 100. 
Dushpradharsha,the  Tathagata,  100. 

Galeniprabha,  the  Tathagata,  100. 
Gandhahastin,  the  Bodhisattva,  90. 
Gandhaprabhasa,  the  Tathagata,  100. 
Gandhottama,  the  Tathagata,  100. 
Gavampati,  90. 
Gems,  four  and  seven,  92  seq.,  see 

note  3  ;  94. 
Gem-trees,  94. 
Genii,  102. 
Gods,  102. 
Great  disciples  (mahajravaka),    89, 

see  note  3. 
Gvalanaprabha,  see  Galeniprabha. 

Hells,  97. 

Indra  or  King,  90,  see  note  5. 
Indraketudhva^arag-a,     the    Tatha- 
gata, 100. 

Kalodayin,  90. 
^andrasuryapradipa,  the  Tathagata, 

100. 
Knowledge,  five  kinds  of,   89,   see 

note  2  ;   steps  leading  towards 

the  highest  k.,  96 ;  transcendent 

true  k.,  101  ;   102. 

Mahakapphiwa,  90. 
Mahakajyapa,  90. 
Mahakatyayana,  90. 
Mahakaush//jila,  90. 
Mahamaudgalyayana,  90. 
Mahameru,  the  Tathagata,  99. 
Mahaprabha,  the  Tathagata,  100. 
Maharatnaketu,  the  Tathagata,  100. 


io6 


THE    SMALLER    SUKHAVATi-VYtjHA. 


Mahar>tiskandha,     the     Tathagata, 

loo  (tiis). 
IMahay;ina-bQtra,  102  seq. 
Maw^udhva^a,  the  Tathagata,  99. 
Ma/?_i,'Ujri,  tne  prince,  90. 
Men  and  gods,  loa. 
Meriidhvajj^a,  the  Tathagata,  99. 
Mcruprabhasa,  the  Tathagata,  99. 
Merupradipa,  the  Tathagata,  100. 

Nakshatrara^a,  the  Tathagata,  100. 
Nanda,  90. 

Nityodyiikta,  the  Bodhisattva,  90. 
Numbers  in  Buddhist  literature,  91, 
note  I. 

PaH,  its  influence  on  Sanskrit,  loi, 

note  2. 
Powers,  five,  96. 
Prabhakara,  the  Tathagata,  100. 
Prayer,  98  ;   10 1  seq. 

Rahula,  90. 
Ratnakusumasampushpitagatra,   the 

Tathagata,  100. 
Ratnotpalajri,  the  Tathagata,  loi. 
Rcvata,  90. 

Saha,  the  world  S.,  102. 

i^akra,  the  king  of  the  Devas,  90. 


5akyaniuni,   the    sovereign    of    the 

5akyas,  102. 
Salendraraifa,  the  Tathagata,  10 1. 
5ariputra,  the  elder,  90  seqq. 
Sarvarthadarja,  the  Tathagata,  10 1. 
Sf^Koj,  90,  note  4. 
Siwha,  the  Tathagata,  100. 
Spirits,  evil,  102. 
5ravasti,  89 ;   91. 
Steps  (seven)  leading  to  the  highest 

knowledge  (bodhyanga),  96. 
5uddharajiniprabha,  the  Tathagata, 

100. 
i'uddhipanthaka,  90. 
Sukhavati,  91  seqq. ;  99, 
Sumcrukalpa,  the  Tathagata,  loi. 

Tathagata,  91;  95;  97  seqq. 

Vaipulya  Sutras,  103. 
Vaijvanaranirghosha,  the  Tathagata, 

100. 
Vakkula,  90. 
Virtues,  five,  96. 

Water,  eight  good  qualities  of,  93. 

Yama,  realm  of,  97. 
Yaja/^prabha,  the  Tathagata,  100. 
Yaja/^prabhava,  the  Tathagata,  100. 
Yajas,  the  Tathagata,  100. 


INDEX   OF   SANSKRIT   WORDS, 

CHIEFLY  THOSE  EXPLAINED  IN  THE  NOTES. 


anuparikshipta,   enclosed,   page   92, 

note  2. 
apaya,  the  four  apayas,  i.e.  hell,  97, 

see  note, 
aprameya,  infinite,  98,  n.  i. 
abhi^«a    and    abhi^;7ana,    the    five 

kinds  of  knowledge,  89,  n.  2. 
abhi^«anabhi^7lata,  89,  n.  2. 
ayuta,  a  hundred  koris,  91,  n.  i. 
arahanta  and  arihanta  =  arhat,  90, 

n.  4. 
arthavaja,  cause  and  effect,  99,  n.  i. 
arhat,  90,  n.  4. 

arhanta  =  arhat,  90,  n.  4  ;   loi,  n.  2. 
avaramatraka,  belonging  merely  to 

the  present  life,  98,  n.  2  ;  loi, 

n.  2, 
asankhyeya,  infinite,  98,  n.  i. 
asuraloka,    realm    of    evil    spirits, 

97  note. 
Asurinda,  lord  of  the  Asuras,  90,  n.  5. 

indra,  lord,  90,  n.  5. 
indriya,  five  virtues,  96  note. 

kankana^ala,  see  kihkiwi^ala. 
kakapeya  (kakapeya),  to  be  drunk 

even  by  crows,  93,  n.  2. 
kinkini^ala,  string  of  bells,  92,  n.  i. 
kort,  ten  millions,  91,  n.  i. 
krau«-^a,  snipe,  curlew,  95,  n.  3. 

tiryagyoni,  birth  as  animals,  97  note. 
tish/Aati  dhriyate  yapayati,  'he  stands 

there,  holds  himself,   supports 

himself,'  91,  n,  2. 
tirthakaka,    '  a  crow   at   a    tirtha,' 

94  note. 


divavihara,  noonday  rest,  siesta,  95, 


dharmaw  dejayati,  he   teaches  the 

law,  91,  n.  2. 
dharmaparyaya,  loi,  n.  2. 

nayuta,  i  with  22  zeros,  91,  n.  i. 
naraka,  hell,  97  note, 
niyuta,  a  hundred  ayutas,  91,  n.  i. 
niraya,  hell,  97  note. 
nirvetbana,  loi,  n.  2. 

purobhaktena,  before  the  morning 
meal,  95,  n.  i  ;  loi,  n.  2. 

prati,  pratiyatha,  loi,  n.  2. 

pretaloka,  realm  of  the  departed, 
97  note. 

bala,  five  powei-s,  96  note, 
bodhyanga,     seven     steps     leading 

towards  the  highest  knowledge, 

96  note. 

mahajravaka,  great  disciple,  90,  n.  3. 

yamaloka,  realm  of  Yama,  97  note, 
yapayati,  'he  supports  himself,'  91, 
n.  2  ;   loi,  n.  2. 

vai^urya,  lapis  lazuli,  or  cat's  eye, 
92  seq.,  n.  3. 

sankhya,  iti  sankhyaw  ga^^/^anti, 
they  are  called,  98,  n.  i;  lot, 
n.  2. 

sambahula  =  bahula,  loi,  n.  2. 

stha,  see  tishf/&ati. 


THE 

vagra^^/zedikA 


THE 

VA  G  R  A  KKH  E  D  I  K  A 

OR 

DIAMOND-CUTTER. 

Adoration  to  the  blessed  Arya-pra^;1a-piramitd 
(perfection  of  wisdom). 

I. 

Thus  it  was  heard  by  me  :  At  one  time  Bhagavat 
(the  blessed  Buddha)  dwelt  in  ^'ravasti,  in  the  grove 
of  Ceta  \  in  the  garden  of  Anathapi;/</ada  ^,  together 
with  a  large  company  of  Bhikshus  (mendicants),  viz. 
with  1 250  Bhikshus  ^  with  many  noble-minded  Bodhi- 
sattvas  *. 

^  (?eta,  son  of  king  Prasena^it,  to  whom  the  park  belonged 
before  it  was  sold  to  Anathapiwfl'ada. 

^  Another  name  of  Sudatta,  meaning,  literally,  he  who  gives 
food  to  the  poor. 

'  The  number  of  1250  is  explained  by  a  Chinese  priest  Luh-hih, 
in  his  commentary  on  the  Amilayur-dhyana-siitra.  According  to 
the  Dharmagupta-vinaya,  which  he  quotes,  the  number  consisted 
of  500  disciples  of  Uruvilva-kaj-yapa,  300  of  Gaya-kajyapa,  200  of 
Nadi-kajyapa,  150  of  6ariputra,  and  100  of  Maudgalyayana.  The 
Chinese  translators  often  mistook  the  Sanskrit  expression  '  half- 
thirteen  hundred,'  i.e.  1250.  See  Bunyiu  Nanjio,  Catalogue  of 
Tripi/aka,  p.  6. 

*  Higher  beings  on  the  road  to  Bodhi  or  perfect  knowledge. 
They  are  destined  hereafter  to  become  Buddhas  themselves. 


112  THE    VAGRAKKflEDlKA 


Then  Bhagavat  having  in  the  forenoon  put  on  his 
undergarment ',  and  having  taken  his  bowl  and  cloak, 
entered  the  great  city  of  6'ravastt  to  collect  alms. 
Then  Bhagavat,  after  he  had  gone  to  the  great  city 
of  6'ravasti  to  collect  alms,  performed  the  act  of 
eating",  and  having  returned  from  his  round  in  the 
afternoon  ^  he  put  away  his  bowl  and  cloak,  washed 
his  feet,  and  sat  down  on  the  seat  intended  *  for  him, 
crossing  his  legs  °,  holding  his  body  upright,  and 
turning  his  reflection  upon  himself.  Then  many 
Bhikshus  approached  to  where  Bhagavat  was, 
saluted  his  feet  with  their  heads,  turned  three 
times  round  him  to  the  right,  and  sat  down  on  one 
side,     (i) 

II. 

At  that  time  again  the  venerable  Subhuti  came 
to  that  assembly  and  sat  down.  Then  rising  from 
his  seat  and  putting  his  robe  over  one  shoulder, 
kneeling  on  the  earth  with  his  right  knee,  he 
stretched  out  his  folded  hands  towards  Bhagavat 
and  said  to  him  :  '  It  is  wonderful,  O  Bhagavat,  it 
is  exceedingly  wonderful,  O  Sugata,  how  much  the 
noble-minded  Bodhisattvas  have  been  favoured  with 
the  highest  favour  by  the  Tathagata,  the  holy  and 

'  In  Pali  pubbawhasamayawi  nivasetva,  the  technical  expres- 
sion for  putting  on  the  robes  early  in  the  morning ;  see  Chiklers, 
s.  V.  nivaseti. 

'  In  Pali  katabhattaki/f^o,  see  Childcrs,  s.v. 

"  In  Pali  paX'/'/iabhatlaw  pi^/r/apatapa/ikkanta,  see 
Chiklers,  s.  V.  j)i;;</ap  fit  a.  Vi^g'.  observes  that  paXX7/abhatta/« 
pi«</apatapa/ikkanto  is  a  vartpov  irp6Ttpov,  as  it  means,  having 
returned  from  his  rounds,  and  then  made  his  meal  on  the  food 
obtained  on  his  rounds. 

*  Pali  pa;7/?ata. 

'-'  lUirnouf,  Lotus,  p.  334. 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  II3 

fully  enlightened!  It  is  wonderful  how  much  the 
noble-minded  Bodhisattvas  have  been  instructed^ 
with  the  highest  instruction  by  the  Tathagata,  the 
holy  and  fully  enlightened  !  How  then,  O  Bha- 
gavat,  should  the  son  or  the  daughter  of  a  good 
family,  after  having  entered  on  the  path  of  the 
Bodhisattvas,  behave,  how  should  he  advance,  and 
how  should  he  restrain  his  thoughts  ? ' 

After  the  venerable  Subhuti  had  thus  spoken, 
Bhagavat  said  to  him  :  *  Well  said,  well  said,  Su- 
bhuti !  So  it  is,  Subhuti,  so  it  is,  as  you  say.  The 
noble-minded  Bodhisattvas  have  been  favoured  with 
the  highest  favour  by  the  Tathagata,  the  noble- 
minded  Bodhisattvas  have  been  instructed  with  the 
highest  instruction  by  the  Tathagata.  Therefore, 
O  Subhuti,  listen  and  take  it  to  heart,  well  and 
rightly.  I  shall  tell  you,  how  any  one  who  has 
entered  on  the  path  of  Bodhisattvas  should  behave, 
how  he  should  advance,  and  how  he  should  restrain 
his  thoughts.'  Then  the  venerable  Subhuti  an- 
swered the  Bhagavat  and  said :  '  So  be  it,  O  Bha- 
gavat.'    (2) 

III. 

Then  the  Bhagavat  thus  spoke  to  him:  *  Any  one, 
O  Subhuti,  who  has  entered  here  on  the  path  of  the 
Bodhisattvas  must  thus  frame  his  thought :  As  many 
beings  as  there  are  in  this  world  of  beings,  compre- 
hended under  the  term  of  beings  (either  born  of  eggs, 
or  from  the  womb,  or  from  moisture,  or  miraculously), 
with  form  or  without  form,  with  name  or  without 
name,  or  neither  with  nor  without  name,  as  far  as 


'  I  have  followed  the  Chinese  translator,  who  translates  p  a  r  1  n  d  i  t  a 
by  instructed,  entrusted,  not  by  protected. 

[49]  *  I 


114  "T"^    VAGRAKKHEDIKA 

any  kiunvn  world  of  beings  is  known,  all  these  must 
be  delivered  by  me  in  the  perfect  world  of  Nirvawa. 
And  yet,  after  I  have  thus  delivered  immeasurable 
beings,  not  one  single  being  has  been  delivered. 
And  why?  If,  O  Subhuti,  a  Bodhisattva  had  any 
idea  of  (belief  in)  a  being,  he  could  not  be  called 
a  Bodhisattva  (one  who  is  fit  to  become  a  Buddha). 
And  why  ?  Because,  O  Subhuti,  no  one  is  to  be 
called  a  Bodhisattva,  for  whom  there  should  exist 
the  idea  of  a  being,  the  idea  of  a  living  being,  or 
the  idea  of  a  person.'     (3) 

IV. 

'And  again,  O  Subhuti,  a  gift  should  not  be  given 
by  a  Bodhisattva,  while  he  believes  ^  in  objects  ; 
a  gift  should  not  be  given  by  him,  while  he  believes 
in  anything ;  a  gift  should  not  be  given  by  him, 
while  he  believes  in  form  ;  a  orift  should  not  be  oiven 
by  him,  while  he  believes  in  the  special  qualities  of 
.sound,  smell,  taste,  and  touch.  For  thus,  O  Subhuti, 
should  a  gift  be  given  by  a  noble-minded  Bodhi- 
sattva, that  he  should  not  believe  even  in  the  idea 
of  cause.  And  why  ?  Because  that  Bodhisattva, 
O  Subhuti,  who  gives  a  gift,  without  believing  in 
anything,  the  measure  of  his  stock  of  merit  is  not 
easy  to  learn.' — '  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti,  is 
it  easy  to  learn  the  measure  of  space  in  the  eastern 
quarter  ?'  Subhilti  said:  'Not  indeed,  O  Bhagavat.' 
— Bhagavat  said  :  '  In  like  manner,  is  it  easy  to 
learn  the  measure  of  space  in  the  southern,  western, 
northern  (juarters,  below  and  above  (nadir  and 
/.enith),  in  (luarters  and  subquarters,  in  the  ten 
quarters  all  round?'     SubhOti   said:  'Not  indeed, 


To  believe  here  means  to  depend  on  or  to  accept  as  real. 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  I  I  5 

O  Bhagavat.'  Bhagavat  said  :  '  In  the  same  manner, 
O  Subhuti,  the  measure  of  the  stock  of  merit  of 
a  Bodhisattva,  who  gives  a  gift  without  beheving 
in  anything,  is  not  easy  to  learn.  And  thus  indeed, 
O  Subhuti,  should  one  who  has  entered  on  the  path 
of  Bodhisattvas  give  a  gift,  that  he  should  not  be- 
lieve even  in  the  idea  of  cause.'     (4) 

V. 

'  Now,  what  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti,  should 
a  Tathagata  be  seen  (known)  by  the  possession  of 
signs  ^  ? '  Subhuti  said  :  '  Not  indeed,  O  Bhagavat, 
a  Tathagata  is  not  to  be  seen  (known)  by  the  pos- 
session of  signs.  And  why  ?  Because  what  has 
been  preached  by  the  Tathagata  as  the  possession 
of  signs,  that  is  indeed  the  possession  of  no-signs.' 

After  this,  Bhagavat  spoke  thus  to  the  venerable 
Subhuti  :  '  Wherever  there  is,  O  Subhuti,  the  pos- 
session of  signs,  there  is  falsehood ;  wherever  there 
is  no  possession  of  signs,  there  is  no  falsehood. 
Hence  the  Tathagata  is  to  be  seen  (known)  from 
no-signs  as  signs  ^.'     (5) 

VI. 

After  this,  the  venerable  Subhtjti  spoke  thus  to 
the  Bhagavat :  '  Forsooth,  O  Bhagavat,  will  there 
be  any  beings  in  the  future,  in  the  last  time,  in  the 
last  moment,  in  the  last  500  years  ^  during  the  time 

'  Qualities  by  which  he  could  be  known. 

''■  It  would  be  easier  to  read  lakshawalaksha/^atvata/i,  from 
the  signs  having  the  character  of  no-signs.  M.  de  Harlez  translates 
rightly,  '  c'est  par  le  non-marque  de  marquer  que  la  Tathagata  doit 
etre  vu  et  reconnu.' 

^  I  have  changed  Paw/^a^ati  into  Paw^a^ati,  because  what  is 

*  I  2 


I  I  6  THE    \AGRAKKHEDIKA 

of  the  decay  of  the  good  Law,  who,  when  these  very 
words  of  the  SCitras  are  being  preached,  will  frame 
a  true  idea  '  ?'  The  Bhagavat  said  :  '  Do  not  speak 
thus,  Subhuti.  Yes,  there  will  be  some  beings  in 
the  future,  in  the  last  time,  in  the  last  moment,  in 
the  last  500  years,  during  the  decay  of  the  good  Law, 
who  will  frame  a  true  idea  when  these  very  words 
are  being  preached. 

'  And  again,  O  SubhClti,  there  will  be  noble-minded 
Bodhisattvas,  in  the  future,  in  the  last  time,  in  the 
last  moment,  in  the  last  500  years,  during  the  decay 
of  the  good  Law,  there  will  be  strong  and  good  and 
wise  beings,  who,  when  these  very  words  of  the 
Sutras  are  being  preached,  will  frame  a  true  idea. 
But  those  noble-minded  Bodhisattvas,  O  Subhuti, 
will  not  have  served  one  Buddha  only,  and  the  stock 

intended  here  is  evidently  the  last  of  the  periods  of  500  years  each, 
which,  according  to  the  Mahayana-Buddhists,  elapsed  after  the 
death  of  Buddha.  The  following  extract  from  the  Mahasannipata- 
sQtra  (Ta-tsi-king,  No.  61  inTripi/aka),  given  to  me  by]\Ir.B.  Nanjio, 
fully  explains  the  subject.  '  It  is  stated  in  the  fifty-first  section 
of  the  IMahasannipata-sutra,  that  Buddha  e^aid  :  "  After  my  Nirvawa, 
in  the  first  500  years,  all  the  Bhikshus  and  others  will  be  strong  in 
deliberation  in  my  correct  Law.  (Those  who  first  obtain  the  '  holy 
fruit,'  i.e.  the  Srota-apannas,  are  called  those  who  have  obtained 
deliberation.)  In  the  next  or  second  500  years,  they  will  be 
strong  in  meditation.  In  the  next  or  third  500  years,  they  will  be 
strong  in  'much  learning,'  i.e.  bahu.rruta,  religious  knowledge. 
In  the  next  or  fourth  500  years,  they  will  be  strong  in  founding 
monasteries,  &c.  In  the  last  or  fifth  500  years,  they  will  be  strong 
in  fighting  and  rcjjroving.  The  pure  (lit.  white)  Law  will  then 
become  invisible." ' 

The  question  then  fore  amounts  to  this,  whether  in  that  corrupt 
age  the  law  of  Buddha  will  still  be  understood .-'  and  the  answer  is, 
that  there  will  l)e  always  some  excellent  Boddhisaitvas  who,  even 
in  the  age  of  corruption,  can  understand  the  preaching  of  the  Law. 

'  Will  understand  them  properly. 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  I  I  7 

of  their  merit  will  not  have  been  accumulated  under 
one  Buddha  only ;  on  the  contrary,  O  Subhuti,  those 
noble-minded  Bodhisattvas  will  have  served  many 
hundred  thousands  of  Buddhas,  and  the  stock  of 
their  merit  will  have  been  accumulated  under  many 
hundred  thousands  of  Buddhas ;  and  they,  when 
these  very  words  of  the  Sutras  are  being  preached, 
will  obtain  one  and  the  same  faith  ^  They  are 
known,  O  Subhuti,  by  the  Tathagata  through  his 
Buddha-knowledge ;  they  are  seen,  O  Subhuti,  by 
the  Tathagata  through  his  Buddha-eye ;  they  are 
understood,  O  Subhuti,  by  the  Tathagata.  All 
these,  O  Subhuti,  will  produce  and  will  hold  fast 
an  immeasurable  and  innumerable  stock  of  merit. 
And  why  ?  Because,  O  Subhuti,  there  does  not 
exist  in  those  noble-minded  Bodhisattvas  the  idea 
of  self,  there  does  not  exist  the  idea  of  a  being,  the 
idea  of  a  living  being,  the  idea  of  a  person.  Nor 
does  there  exist,  O  Subhuti,  for  these  noble-minded 
Bodhisattvas  the  idea  of  quality  (dharma),  nor  of 
no-quality.  Neither  does  there  exist,  O  Subhuti, 
any  idea  (sa;;2^/la)  or  no-idea.  And  why  ?  Because, 
O  Subhuti,  if  there  existed  for  these  noble-minded 
Bodhisattvas  the  idea  of  quality,  then  they  would 
believe  in  a  self,  they  would  believe  in  a  being,  they 
would  believe  in  a  living  being,  they  would  believe 
in  a  person.  And  if  there  existed  for  them  the  idea 
of  no-quality,  even  then  they  would  believe  in  a  self, 

^  I  am  doubtful  about  the  exact  meaning  of  eka^ittaprasSda. 
Childers  gives  eka^'itta,  as  an  adjective,  with  the  meaning  of '  having 
the  same  thought,'  and  /tittaprasada,  as  faith  in  Buddha.  But 
eka/^ittaprasada  may  also  be  '  faiih  produced  by  one  thought,' 
'  immediate  faith,'  and  this  too  is  a  recognised  form  of  faith  in 
Buddhism.     See  Sukhavati,  pp.  71,  108. 


Il8  THE    VAGRAKKHEDlVik 

they  would  believe  in  a  being,  they  would  believe  in 
a  living  being,  they  would  believe  in  a  person.  And 
wh)'  ?  Because,  O  Subhuti,  neither  quality  nor  no- 
quality  is  to  be  accepted  by  a  noble-minded  Bodhi- 
sattva.  Therefore  this  hidden  saying  has  been 
preached  b\-  the  Tathagata  :  "  By  those  who  know 
the  teaching  of  the  Law,  as  like  unto  a  raft,  all 
qualities  indeed  must  be  abandoned ;  much  more 
no-qualities  '."  '     (6) 

\TL 

And  again  Bhagavat  spoke  thus  to  the  venerable 
Subhuti  :  'What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti,  is  there 
anything  (dharma)  that  was  known  by  the  Tathagata 
under  the  name  of  the  highest  perfect  knowledge,  or 
anything  that  was  taught  by  the  Tathagata  ? ' 

After  these  w^ords,  the  venerable  SubhCiti  spoke 
thus  to  Bhagavat:  'As  I,  O  Bhagavat,  understand 
the  meaning  of  the  preaching  of  the  Bhagavat,  there 
is  nothing  that  was  known  by  the  Tathagata  under 
the  name  of  the  highest  perfect  knowledge,  nor  is 
there  an)lhing  that  is  taught  by  the  Tathagata. 
And  why  ?  Because  that  thing  which  w^as  known 
or  taught  by  the  Tathagata  is  incomprehensible  and 
inexpressible.  It  is  neither  a  thing  nor  no-thing. 
And  why  ?  Because  the  holy  persons  ^  are  of  im- 
perfect power  ^.'     (7) 

'  The  same  line  is  quoted  in  the  Abhidharmakosha-vyakhya. 

'  Arya[iudgala  need  not  be  Bodhisattvas,  but  all  who  have  entered 
on  ihe  paih  leading  to  Nirvawa. 

*  Ilarlcz :  '  Parceque  les  entitcs  supdrieures  sont  produitcs 
tcllcs  sans  6tre  rdelles  et  parfaites  pour  ccla.'  If  sawskr/ta  can  be 
used  in  Buddhist  literature  in  the  sense  of  pcrfocl,  and  prabhavita 
as  power,  my  translation  might  pass,  but  even  then  the  '  because  ' 
remains  difficult. 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  II9 

VIII. 

Bhagavat  said :  '  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti, 
if  a  son  or  daughter  of  a  good  family  filled  this  sphere 
of  a  million  millions  of  worlds'  with  the  seven  orems 
or  treasures,  and  gave  it  as  a  gift  to  the  holy  and 
enlightened  Tathagatas,  would  that  son  or  daughter 
of  a  good  family  on  the  strength  of  this  produce 
a  large  stock  of  merit  ? '  Subhuti  said  :  '  Yes,  O 
Bhagavat,  yes,  O  Sugata,  that  son  or  daughter  of 
a  good  family  would  on  the  strength  of  this  produce 
a  large  stock  of  merit.  And  why  ?  Because,  O 
Bhagavat,  what  was  preached  by  the  Tathagata  as 
the  stock  of  merit,  that  was  preached  by  the  Tatha- 
gata as  no-stock  of  merit.  Therefore  the  Tatha- 
gata preaches  :  "  A  stock  of  merit,  a  stock  of  merit  ^ 
indeed  ! "  '  Bhagavat  said  :  '  And  if,  O  Subhuti,  the 
son  or  daughter  of  a  good  family  should  fill  this 
sphere  of  a  million  millions  of  worlds  with  the  seven 
treasures  and  should  give  it  as  a  gift  to  the  holy 
and  enlightened  Tathagatas,  and  if  another  after 
takinof  from  this  treatise  of  the  Law  one  Gatha  of 
four  lines  only  should  fully  teach  others  and  explain 
it,  he  indeed  would  on  the  strength  of  this  produce 
a  larger  stock  of  merit  immeasurable  and  innumer- 
able.  And  why  ?  Because,  O  Subhuti,  the  highest 
perfect  knowledge  of  the  holy  and  enlightened 
Tathagatas  is  produced  from  it  ;  the  blessed 
Buddhas  are  produced  from  it.  And  why  ?  Be- 
cause, O  Subhuti,  when    the  Tathagata   preached  : 

^  See  Childers,  s.  v.  Lokadhatu. 

*  Or  should  it  be,  bhashate^puwyaskandhaj^  puwyaskandha  iti, 
i.  e.  he  preaches  no-stock  of  merit  is  the  slock  of  merit  ?  It  would 
not  be  applicable  to  later  passages,  but  the  style  of  the  SQtras  varies. 


I20  THE   XAGKAKKIIEDIKA 

"  The  qualities  of  Buddha,  the  quahties  of  Buddha 
indeed  !  "  they  were  preached  by  him  as  no-qualities 
of  Buddha.  Therefore  they  are  called  the  qualities 
of  Buddha."     (8) 

IX. 

Bhagavat  said '  :  '  Now,  what  do  you  think,  O 
Subhuti,  does  a  Srota-dpanna '  think  in  this  wise: 
The  fruit  of  Srota-apatti  has  been  obtained  by  me  ?  ' 
Subhuti  said :  '  Not  indeed,  O  Bhagavat,  a  Srota- 
apanna  does  not  think  in  this  wise  :  The  fruit  of 
Srota-apatti  has  been  obtained  by  me.  And  why  ? 
Because,  O  Bhagavat,  he  has  not  obtained  any 
particular  state  (dharma).  Therefore  he  is  called 
a  Srota-^panna.  He  has  not  obtained  any  form, 
nor  sounds,  nor  smells,  nor  tastes,  nor  things  that 
can  be  touched.  Therefore  he  is  called  a  Srota- 
apanna.  If,  O  Bhagavat,  a  Srota-apanna  were  to 
think  in  this  wise  :  The  fruit  of  Srota-apatti  has 
been  obtained  by  me,  he  would  believe  in  a  self, 
he  would  believe  in  a  being,  he  would  believe  in 
a  living  being,  he  would  believe  in  a  person.' 

Bhagavat  said  :  '  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti, 
does  a  Sakr/dagamin  think  in  this  wise  :  The  fruit 
of  a  Sakr/dagamin  has  been  obtained  by  me  ? ' 
Subhuti  said  :    '  Not  indeed,  O  Bhagavat,  a  Sak/V- 

'  This  phrase  is  wanting  in  ihe  Sanskrit  MSS.,  but  it  is  found 
in  the  Chinese  transkilion  of  Dharmagupta,  of  the  Sui  dynasty 
(a.d.  589-618). 

*  Srota-apanna,  a  man  who  has  obtained  the  first  grade  of  sancti- 
fication,  Utcrally,  who  has  entered  the  stream.  The  second  grade 
is  that  of  the  Sak;7dagamin,  who  returns  once.  The  third  grade  is 
that  of  the  Anagamin,  who  does  not  return  at  all,  but  is  born  in  the 
IJrahman  world  from  whence  he  becomes  an  Arhat  and  may  obtain 
Nirvawa. 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  121 

dagamin  does  not  think  in  this  wise  :  The  fruit 
of  a  Sakrz'dagamin  has  been  obtained  by  me. 
And  why  ?  Because  he  is  not  an  individual 
being  (dharma),  who  has  obtained  the  state  of 
a  Sakr/dagamin.  Therefore  he  is  called  a  Sakr/- 
dagamin.' 

Bhagavat  said  :  *  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti, 
does  an  Anagamin  think  in  this  wise  :  The  fruit  of 
an  Anagamin  has  been  obtained  by  me  ? '  Subhuti 
said :  '  Not  indeed,  O  Bhagavat,  an  Anagamin  does 
not  think  in  this  wise  :  The  fruit  of  an  Anagamin 
has  been  obtained  by  me.  And  why  ?  Because  he 
is  not  an  individual  being,  who  has  obtained  the 
state  of  an  Anagamin.  Therefore  he  is  called  an 
Anagamin.' 

Bhagavat  said :  '  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti, 
does  an  Arhat  think  in  this  wise :  The  fruit  of  an 
Arhat  has  been  obtained  by  me  ? '  Subhuti  said  : 
'  Not  indeed,  O  Bhagavat,  an  Arhat  does  not  think 
in  this  wise  :  The  fruit  of  an  Arhat  has  been  obtained 
by  me.  And  why  ?  Because  he  is  not  an  indi- 
vidual being-,  who  is  called  an  Arhat.  Therefore 
he  is  called  an  Arhat.  And  if,  O  Bhagavat,  an 
Arhat  were  to  think  in  this  wise  :  The  state  of 
an  Arhat  has  been  obtained  by  me,  he  would 
believe  in  a  self,  he  would  believe  in  a  being,  he 
would  believe  in  a  living  being,  he  would  believe  in 
a  person. 

'  And  why  ?  I  have  been  pointed  out,  O  Bha- 
gavat, by  the  holy  and  fully  enlightened  Tathagata, 
as    the    foremost   of  those   who    dwell    in   virtue  \ 

^  Arawaviharin.  Rawa  is  strife, then  sin,  therefore  ara«a  might 
be  peace  and  virtue,  only  the  a  would  be  short.  Probably  arawa- 
viharin  was  formed  with  reference  to  ara«ya-viharin,  living  in 


122  THE    WAGRAKKHEDIK.A 

I,  O  Bhagavat,  am  an  Arhat,  freed  from  passion. 
And  yet,  O  Bhagavat,  I  do  not  think  in  this  wise: 
I  am  an  Arhat,  I  am  freed  from  passion.  If, 
O  Bhagavat,  I  should  think  in  this  wise,  that  the 
state  of  an  Arhat  has  been  obtained  by  me.  then 
the  Tathagata  would  not  have  truly  prophesied  of 
me,  sa)ing  :  "  Subhilti,  the  son  of  a  good  family, 
the  foremost  of  those  dwelling  in  virtue,  does  not 
dwell  anywhere,  and  therefore  he  is  called  a  dweller 
in  virtue,  a  dweller  in  virtue  indeed  !  "  '    (9) 

X. 

Bhagavat  said  :  '  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti, 
is  there  anything  (dharma)  which  the  Tathagata  has 
adopted  from  the  Tathagata  Diparikara  \  the  holy 
and  fully  enlightened  ?  '  Subhuti  said  :  '  Not  indeed, 
O  Bhagavat ;  there  is  not  anything  which  the  Tatha- 
gata has  adopted  from  the  Tathagata  Dipahkara,  the 
holy  and  fully  enlightened.' 

Bhagavat  said :  'If,  O  Subhuti.  a  Bodhisattva 
should  say:  "  I  shall  create  numbers  of  worlds,"  he 
would  say  what  is  untrue.  And  why  ?  Because, 
O  Subhuti,  when  the  Tathagata  preached  :  "  Num- 
bers of  worlds,  numbers  of  worlds  indeed  ! "  they 
were  preached  by  him  as  no-numbers.  Therefore 
they  are  called  numbers  of  worlds. 

'Therefore,  O  Subhilti,  a  noble-minded  Bodhi- 
sattva should    in   this   wise    frame  an   independent 

the  forest,  retired  from  the  world,  and  in  peace,  just  as  arhan, 
worthy,  was  changed  into  arahan,  the  destroyer  of  sin.  Bcal 
translates,  'one  who  dchghts  in  the  mortification  of  an  Arawyaka 
(forest  devotee).*  De  Harlez:  '  chef  de  ceu.x  qui  ne  sont  plus  attacin^s 
h  la  jouissancc.' 

'  A  forn»er  lUuldha. 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  I  23 

mind,  which  is  to  be  framed  as  a  mind  not  believing 
in  anything,  not  believing-  in  form,  not  beHeving  in 
sound,  smell,  taste,  and  anything  that  can  be  touched. 
Now,  for  instance,  O  Subhuti,  a  man  might  have 
a  body  and  a  large  body,  so  that  his  size  should  be 
as  large  as  the  king  of  mountains,  Sumeru.  Do 
you  think  then,  O  Subhuti,  that  his  selfhood  (he 
himself)  would  be  large  ?  '  Subhuti  said  :  '  Yes,  O 
Bhagavat,  yes,  O  Sugata,  his  selfhood  would  be  large. 
And  why?  Because,  O  Bhagavat,  when  the  Tatha- 
gata  preached :  "  Selfliood,  selfhood  indeed  !  "  it  was 
preached  by  him  as  no-selfliood.  Therefore  it  is 
called  selfhood.'    (ro) 

XI. 
Bhagavat  said  :  '  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhilti, 
if  there  were  as  many  Gaiiga  rivers  as  there  are 
grains  of  sand  in  the  large  river  Gaiiga,  would  the 
grains  of  sand  be  many  ?  '  Subhuti  said  :  '  Those 
Gahga  rivers  would  indeed  be  many,  much  more  the 
grains  of  sand  in  those  Gahga  rivers.'  Bhagavat 
said  :  '  I  tell  you,  O  Subhuti,  I  announce  to  you, 
If  a  woman  or  man  were  to  fill  with  the  seven 
treasures  as  many  worlds  as  there  would  be  grains 
of  sand  in  those  Gaiiga  rivers  and  present  them  as 
a  gift  to  the  holy  and  fully  enlightened  Tathagatas 
— What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti,  would  that  woman 
or  man  on  the  strength  of  this  produce  a  large  stock 
of  merit  ?  '  Subhuti  said  :  '  Yes,  O  Bhagavat,  yes, 
O  Sugata,  that  woman  or  man  would  on  the  strength 
of  this  produce  a  large  stock  of  merit,  immeasur- 
able and  innumerable.'  Bhagavat  said  :  '  And  if, 
O  Subhuti,  a  woman  or  man  having  filled  so  many 
worlds  with  the  seven  treasures  should  give  them 
as  a  gift  to  the  holy  and  enlightened  Tathagatas, 


124  THE    VAGKAATA'HEDIKA 

and  if  another  son  or  daughter  of  a  good  family, 
after  taking  from  this  treatise  of  the  Law  one  Gatha 
of  four  hnes  only,  should  fully  teach  others  and 
explain  it,  he,  indeed,  would  on  the  strength  of  this 
produce  a  larger  stock  of  merit,  immeasurable  and 
innumerable.'    (ii) 

XII. 

'  Then  again,  O  Subhuti,  that  part  of  the  world 
in  which,  after  taking  from  this  treatise  of  the  Law 
one  Gatha  of  four  lines  only,  it  should  be  preached 
or  explained,  would  be  like  a  A'aitya  (holy  shrine) 
for  the  whole  world  of  gods,  men,  and  spirits ;  what 
should  we  say  then  of  those  who  learn  the  whole 
of  this  treatise  of  the  Law  to  the  end,  who  repeat 
it,  understand  it,  and  fully  explain  it  to  others  ? 
They,  O  Subhuti,  will  be  endowed  with  the  highest 
wonder  \  And  in  that  place,  O  SubhCiii,  there 
dwells  the  teacher'-,  or  one  after  another  holding 
the  place  of  the  wise  preceptor  ^'    (12) 

XIH. 
After  these  words,  the  venerable  Subhuti  spoke 
thus  to  Bhagavat :  '  O  Bhagavat,  how  is  this  treatise 
of  the  Law  called,  and  how  can  I  learn  it  ? '  After 
this,  Bhagavat  spoke  thus  to  the  venerable  Subhuti  : 
'  This  treatise  of  the  Law,  O  Subhuti,  is  called  the 
Pra<^y}a-pdramita  (Transcendent  wisdom),  and  you 
should  learn  it  by  that  name.  And  why  ?  Because, 
O  SubhClti,  what  was  preached  by  the  Tathagata 
as  the   Pra^wi-pAramitd,  that  was  preached  by  the 

'  With  what  excites  the  highest  wonder. 
'  .Vasia,  often  the  name  of  Buddha.  P;ili  salt  ha. 
'  Tliis  may  refer  to  a  succession  of  leacliers  handing  down  the 
tradition  one  to  the  other. 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  I  25 

Tathagata  as  no-Paramita.  Therefore  it  is  called 
the  Praf^/)a-paramita. 

'  Then,  what  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti,  is  there 
anything  (dharma)  that  was  preached  by  the  Tatha- 
gata ? '  Subhuti  said  :  '  Not  indeed,  O  Bhagavat, 
there  is  not  anything  that  was  preached  by  the 
Tathagata.' 

Bhagavat  said  :  '  What  do  you  think  then,  O  Su- 
bhuti,— the  dust  of  the  earth  which  is  found  in  this 
•sphere  of  a  million  millions  of  worlds,  is  that  much?  ' 
Subhuti  said  :  '  Yes,  O  Bhagavat,  yes,  O  Sugata, 
that  dust  of  the  earth  would  be  much.  And  why  ? 
Because,  O  Bhagavat,  what  was  preached  by  the 
Tathagata  as  the  dust  of  the  earth,  that  was  preached 
by  the  Tathagata  as  no-dust.  Therefore  it  is  called 
the  dust  of  the  earth.  And  what  was  preached  by 
the  Tathagata  as  the  sphere  of  worlds,  that  was 
preached  by  the  Tathagata  as  no-sphere.  There- 
fore it  is  called  the  sphere  of  worlds.' 

Bhagavat  said  :  '  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti, 
is  a  holy  and  fully  enlightened  Tathagata  to  be  seen 
(known)  by  the  thirty-two  signs  of  a  hero?  '  Subhuti 
said  :  '  No  indeed,  O  Bhagavat ;  a  holy  and  fully 
enlightened  Tathagata  is  not  to  be  seen  (known)  by 
the  thirty-two  signs  of  a  hero.  And  why  ?  Because 
what  was  preached  by  the  Tathagata  as  the  thirty- 
two  signs  of  a  hero,  that  was  preached  by  the 
Tathagata  as  no-signs.  Therefore  they  are  called 
the  thirty-two  signs  of  a  hero.' 

Bhagavat  said  :  '  If,  O  Subhuti,  a  woman  or  man 
should  day  by  day  sacrifice  his   life  (selfhood ')  as 


*  Atmabhava  seems  to  refer  here  to  the  living  body,  not  to  the 
spiritual  Atman,  which,  according  to  Buddha,  can  be  got  rid  of  by 


126  TFiE   VAGRA^AT/fEDIKA 

many  times  as  there  are  grains  of  sand  in  the  river 
Gahga.  and  if  he  should  thus  sacrifice  his  life  for  as 
many  kalpas  as  there  are  grains  of  sand  in  the  river 
Gahga,  and  if  another  man,  after  taking  from  this 
treatise  of  the  Law  one  Gatha  of  four  lines  only, 
should  fully  teach  others  and  explain  it,  he  indeed 
would  on  the  strength  of  this  produce  a  larger  stock 
of  merit,  immeasurable  and  innumerable.'    (13) 

XIV. 

At  that  time,  the  venerable  SubhOti  was  moved 
by  the  power  of  the  Law,  shed  tears,  and  having 
wiped  his  tears,  he  thus  spoke  to  Bhagavat :  '  It  is 
wonderful,  O  Bhagavat,  it  is  exceedingly  wonderful, 
O  Sugata,  how  fully  this  teaching  of  the  Law  has 
been  preached  by  the  Tathagata  for  the  benefit  of 
those  beings  who  entered  on  the  foremost  path  (the 
path  that  leads  to  Nirvdwa),  and  who  entered  on  the 
best  path,  from  whence,  O  Bhagavat,  knowledge  has 
been  produced  in  me.  Never  indeed,  O  Bhagavat, 
has  such  a  teaching  of  the  Law  been  heard  by  me 
before.  Those  Bodhisattvas,  O  Bhagavat,  will  be 
endowed  with  the  highest  wonder  \  who  when  this 
Siltra  is  being  preached  hear  it  and  will  frame  to 
themselves  a  true  idea.  And  why  ?  Because  what 
is  a  true  idea  is  not  a  true  idea.  Therefore  the 
Tathagata  preaches :  "  A  true  idea,  a  true  idea 
indeed ! " 

*  It  is  no  wonder  to  me,  O  Bhagavat,  that  I  accept 
and  believe  this  treatise  of  the  Law,  which  has  been 
preached.      And    those    beings    also,   O    Bhagavat, 

kno\vli(lf,'c  only.  Buddha  himself  sacrificed  his  life  again  and  again, 
and  a  willingness  to  die  would  probably  be  accepted  for  the  deed. 

*  Will  possess  miraculous  powers,  and  will  be  admired. 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  I  27 

who  will  exist  in  the  future,  in  the  last  time,  in  the 
last  moment,  in  the  last  500  )ears,  durino^  the  time 
of  the  decay  of  the  good  Law,  who  will  learn  this 
treatise  of  the  Law,  O  Bhagavat,  remember  it,  recite 
it,  understand  it,  and  fully  explain  it  to  others,  they 
will  indeed  be  endowed  with  the  highest  wonder. 

'  But,  O  Bhagavat,  there  will  not  arise  in  them 
any  idea  of  a  self,  any  idea  of  a  being,  of  a  living 
being,  or  a  person,  nor  does  there  exist  for  them  any 
idea  or  no-idea.  And  why  ?  Because,  O  Bhagavat, 
the  idea  of  a  self  is  no-idea,  and  the  idea  of  a  being, 
or  a  living  being,  or  a  person  is  no-idea.  And  why.'' 
Because  the  blessed  Buddhas  are  freed  from  all 
ideas.' 

After  these  words,  Bhagavat  thus  spoke  to  the 
venerable  Subhuti :  '  So  it  is,  O  Subhuti,  so  it  is. 
Those  beings,  O  Subhuti,  who  when  this  Sutra  was 
being  recited  here  will  not  be  disturbed  or  fright- 
ened or  become  alarmed,  will  be  endowed  with  the 
highest  wonder.  And  why  ?  Because,  O  Subhuti, 
this  was  preached  by  the  Tathagata,  as  the  Parama- 
paramita,  which  is  no-Paramita.  And,  O  Subhuti, 
what  the  Tathagata  preaches  as  the  Paramaparamita, 
that  was  preached  also  by  immeasurable  blessed 
Buddhas.  Therefore  it  is  called  the  Parama- 
paramita. 

'And,  O  Subhuti,  the  Paramita  or  the  highest 
perfection  of  endurance  (kshanti)  belonging  to  a 
Tathagata,  that  also  is  no-Paramita.  And  why  ? 
Because,  O  Subhuti,  at  the  time  when  the  king  of 
Kalinga  ^  cut  my  flesh  from  every  limb,  I  had  no 
idea  of  a  self,  of  a  being,  of  a  living  being,  or  of 

*  The  Chinese  text  points  to  Kalira^a.  On  this  Kalira^a  or 
Kalinr/pa  see  Lalita-vistara,  p.  191. 


128  THE    VAGRAKKHEDIKA. 

a  person  ;  I  had  neither  an  idea  nor  no-idea.  And 
why  ?  Because,  O  Subhuti,  if  I  at  that  time  had 
had  an  idea  of  a  self,  I  should  also  have  had  an 
idea  of  malevolence.  If  I  had  had  an  idea  of  a 
being,  or  of  a  living  being,  or  of  a  person,  I  should 
also  have  had  an  idea  of  malevolence.  And  why  ? 
Because,  O  Subhuti,  I  remember  the  past  500  births, 
when  I  was  the  /vVshi  Kshantivadin  (preacher  of 
endurance).  At  that  time  also,  I  had  no  idea  of 
a  self,  of  a  being,  of  a  living  being,  of  a  person. 
Therefore  then,  O  Subhuti,  a  noble-minded  Bodhi- 
sattva,  after  putting  aside  all  ideas,  should  raise  his 
mind  to  the  highest  perfect  knowledge.  He  should 
frame  his  mind  so  as  not  to  believe  (depend)  in 
form,  sound,  smell,  taste,  or  anything  that  can  be 
touched,  in  something  (dharma),  in  nothing  or  any- 
thing. And  why  ?  Because  what  is  believed  is  not 
believed  (not  to  be  depended  on).  Therefore  the 
Tathagata  preaches:  "A  gift  should  not  be  given  by 
a  Bodhisattva  '  who  believes  in  anything,  it  should 
not  be  given  by  one  w^ho  believes  in  form,  sound, 
smell,  taste,  or  anything  that  can  be  touched." 

'And  again,  O  Subhuti,  a  Bodhisattva  should 
in  such  wise  give  his  gift  for  the  benefit  of  all 
beings.  And  why  ?  Because,  O  Subhuti,  the  idea 
of  a  being  is  no-idea.  And  those  who  are  thus 
spoken  of  by  the  Tathagata  as  all  beings  are  indeed 
no-beings.  And  why  ?  Because,  O  Subhuti,  a 
Tathagata  says  what  is  real,  says  what  is  true,  says 
the  things  as  they  are  ;  a  Tathagata  does  not  speak 
untruth. 

'  But  again,  O  Subhiui,  whatever  doctrine  has  been 

'  See  before,  cliap.  iv. 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  I  29 

perceived,  taught,  and  meditated  on  by  a  Tathagata, 
in  it  there  is  neither  truth  nor  falsehood.  And  as 
a  man  who  has  entered  the  darkness  would  not  see 
anything,  thus  a  Bodhisattva  is  to  be  considered 
who  is  immersed  in  objects,  and  who  being  immersed 
in  objects  gives  a  gift.  But  as  a  man  who  has  eyes 
would,  when  the  nio-ht  becomes  liMit,  and  the  sun 
has  risen,  see  many  things,  thus  a  Bodhisattva  is  to 
be  considered  who  is  not  immersed  in  objects,  and 
who  not  being  immersed  in  objects  gives  a  gift. 

'And  again,  O  Subhuti,  if  any  sons  or  daughters 
of  good  families  will  learn  this  treatise  of  the  Law, 
will  remember,  recite,  and  understand  it,  and  fully 
explain  it  to  others,  they,  O  Subhuti,  are  known  by 
the  Tathagata  through  his  Buddha-knowledge,  they 
are  seen,  O  Subhuti,  by  the  Tathagata  through  his 
Buddha-eye.  All  these  beings,  O  Subhuti,  will 
produce  and  hold  fast  an  immeasurable  and  in- 
numerable stock  of  merit'    (14) 

XV. 

'And  if,  O  Subhuti,  a  w^oman  or  man  sacrificed 
in  the  morning  as  many  lives  as  there  are  grains 
of  sand  in  the  river  Gaiiga  and  did  the  same  at 
noon  and  the  same  in  the  evening,  and  if  in  this  way 
they  sacrificed  their  lives  for  a  hundred  thousands 
of  niyutas  of  ko/is  of  ages,  and  if  another,  after 
hearing  this  treatise  of  the  Law,  should  not  oppose  it, 
then  the  latter  would  on  the  strength  of  this  produce 
a  larger  stock  of  merit,  immeasurable  and  innumer- 
able. What  should  we  say  then  of  him  who  after 
having  written  it,  learns  it,  remembers  it,  under- 
stands it,  and  fully  explains  it  to  others  ? 

'  And  again,  O  Subhuti,  this  treatise  of  the  Law  is 

[49]  *  ^ 


130  THE   VAGRA^^/fEDIKA 

incomprehensible  and  incomparable.  And  this  trea- 
tise of  the  Law  has  been  preached  by  the  Tathagata 
lor  the  benefit  of  those  beings  who  entered  on  the 
foremost  path  (the  path  that  leads  to  Nirva//a),  and 
who  entered  on  the  best  path.  And  those  who  will 
learn  this  treatise  of  the  Law,  who  will  remember  it, 
recite  it,  understand  it,  and  fully  explain  it  to  others, 
they  are  known,  O  Subhuti,  by  the  Tathagata 
through  his  Buddha-knowledge,  they  are  seen,  O 
Subhuti,  by  the  Tathagata  through  his  Buddha- 
e)  e.  All  these  beings,  O  Subhtiti,  will  be  endowed 
with  an  immeasurable  stock  of  merit,  they  will  be 
endowed  with  an  incomprehensible,  incomparable, 
immeasurable  and  unmeasured  stock  of  merit.  All 
these  beings,  O  Subhuti,  will  equally  remember  the 
Bodhi  (the  highest  Buddha-knowledge),  will  recite  it, 
and  understand  it.  And  why  ?  Because  it  is  not 
possible,  O  Subhuti,  that  this  treatise  of  the  Law 
should  be  heard  by  beings  of  little  faith,  by  those 
who  believe  in  self,  in  beings,  in  living  beings,  and 
in  persons.  It  is  impossible  that  this  treatise  of 
the  Law  should  be  heard  by  beings  who  have  not 
acquired  the  knowledge  of  Bodhisattvas,  or  that  it 
should  be  learned,  remembered,  recited,  and  under- 
stood by  them.     The  thing  is  impossible. 

'  And  again,  O  Subhuti,  that  part  of  the  world  in 
which  this  Sutra  will  be  propounded,  will  have  to  be 
honoured  by  the  whole  world  of  gods,  men,  and  evil 
spirits,  will  have  to  be  worshipped,  and  will  become 
like  a  Aaitya  (a  holy  sepulchre).'     (15) 

XVL 

'And,  O  Subhfiti,  sons  or  daughters  of  a  good 
family  who  will   learn  these  very  Sutras,  who  will 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  I3I 

remember  them,  recite  them,  understand  them, 
thoroughly  take  them  to  heart,  and  fully  explain 
them  to  others,  they  will  be  overcome  S  they  will  be 
greatly  overcome.  And  why  ?  Because,  O  Subhuti, 
whatever  evil  deeds  these  beings  have  done  in 
a  former  birth,  deeds  that  must  lead  to  suffering, 
those  deeds  these  beings,  owing  to  their  being  over- 
come, after  they  have  seen  the  Law,  will  destroy,  and 
they  will  obtain  the  knowledge  of  Buddha. 

'  I  remember,  O  Subhuti,  in  the  past,  before  in- 
numerable and  more  than  innumerable  kalpas, 
there  were  eighty-four  hundred  thousands  of  niyutas 
of  ko/'is  of  Buddhas  following-  after  the  venerable  and 
fully  enlightened  Tathagata  Dipankara,  who  were 
pleased  by  me,  and  after  being  pleased  were  not  dis- 
pleased. And  if,  O  Subhuti,  these  blessed  Buddhas 
were  pleased  by  me,  and  after  being  pleased  were 
not  displeased,  and  if  on  the  other  hand  people  at 
the  last  time,  at  the  last  moment,  in  the  last  500 
years,  during  the  time  of  the  decay  of  the  good  Law, 
will  learn  these  very  Sutras,  remember  them,  recite 
them,  understand  them,  and  fully  explain  them  to 
others,  then,  O  Subhuti,  in  comparison  with  their 
stock  of  merit  that  former  stock  of  merit  will  not 
come  to  one  hundredth  part,  nay,  not  to  one  thou- 
sandth part,  not  to  a  hundred  thousandth  part,  not 
to  a  ten  millionth  part,  not  to  a  hundred  millionth 
part,  not  to  a  hundred  thousand  ten  millionth  part, 
not  to  a  hundred  thousands  of  niyutas  ten  millionth 
part.  It  will  not  bear  number,  nor  fraction,  nor  count- 
ing, nor  comparison,  nor  approach,  nor  analogy. 

'  And  if,  O  Subhuti,  I  were  to  tell  you  the  stock  of 

^  Paribhuta  is  explained  by  despised,  but  the  sense,  or  even  the 
non-sense,  is  difficult  to  understand. 

*  K  2 


132  THE    VAGRAKKHEDIKA 

merit  of  those  sons  or  daughters  of  good  families, 
and  how  large  a  stock  of  merit  those  sons  or 
daughters  of  good  families  will  produce,  and  hold 
fast  at  that  time,  people  would  become  distracted 
and  their  thoughts  would  become  bewildered. 
And  again,  O  Subhuti,  as  this  treatise  of  the  Law 
preached  by  the  Tathagata  is  incomprehensible  and 
incomparable,  its  rewards  also  must  be  expected 
(to  be)  incomprehensible.'     (16) 

XVII. 

At  that  time  the  venerable  Subhuti  thus  spoke  to 
the  Bhagavat :  '  How  should  a  person,  after  having 
entered  on  the  path  of  the  Bodhisattvas,  behave, 
how  should  he  advance,  and  how  should  he  restrain 
his  thouMits?'  Bhagravat  said:  'He  who  has 
entered  on  the  path  of  the  Bodhisattvas  should  thus 
frame  his  thought :  All  beings  must  be  delivered  by 
me  in  the  perfect  world  of  Nirva;/a ;  and  yet  after  I 
have  thus  delivered  these  beings,  no  being  has  been 
delivered.  And  why  ?  Because,  O  Subhuti,  if  a 
Bodhisattva  had  any  idea  of  beings,  he  could  not  be 
called  a  Bodhisattva,  and  so  on  ^  from  the  idea  of 
a  living  being  to  the  idea  of  a  person  ;  if  he  had  any 
such  idea,  he  could  not  be  called  a  Bodhisattva.  And 
why  ?  Because,  O  Subhtiti,  there  is  no  such  thing 
(dharma)  as  one  who  has  entered  on  the  path  of  the 
Bodhisattvas. 

'  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti,  is  there  anything 
which  the  Tathagata  has  adopted  from  the  Tatha- 
gata Dipaiikara  with  regard  to  the  highest  perfect 
knowledge  ? '      After   this,    the   venerable    SubhClti 

*   See  chap,  iii,  p.  1  i  4. 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  I  33 


Spoke  thus  to  the  Bhagavat:  'As  far  as  I,  O  Bha- 
gavat,  understand  the  meaning  of  the  preaching  of 
the  Bhagavat,  there  is  nothing  which  has  been 
adopted  by  the  Tathagata  from  the  holy  and  fully 
enlightened  Tathagata  Dipahkara  with  regard  to 
the  highest  perfect  knowledge.'  After  this,  Bha- 
gavat thus  spoke  to  the  venerable  Subhuti :  '  So  it 
is,  Subhuti,  so  it  is.  There  is  not,  O  Subhuti,  any- 
thing which  has  been  adopted  by  the  Tathagata 
from  the  holy  and  fully  enlightened  Tathagata  Di- 
pahkara with  regard  to  the  highest  perfect  know- 
ledge. And  if,  O  Subhuti,  anything  had  been 
adopted  by  the  Tathagata,  the  Tathagata  Dipahkara 
would  not  have  prophesied  of  me,  saying  ^ :  "  Thou, 
O  boy,  wilt  be  in  the  future  the  holy  and  fully 
enlightened  Tathagata  called  ^'akyamuni."  Because 
then,  O  Subhuti,  there  is  nothing  that  has  been 
adopted  by  the  holy  and  fully  enlightened  Tathagata 
with  regard  to  the  highest  perfect  knowledge,  there- 
fore I  was  prophesied  by  the  Tathagata  Dipahkara, 
saying :  "  Thou,  boy,  wilt  be  in  the  future  the  holy 
and  fully  enlightened  Tathagata  called  6akyamuni." 

'  And  why,  O  Subhuti,  the  name  of  Tathagata  ? 
It  expresses  true  suchness.  And  why  Tathagata,  O 
Subhuti  ?  It  expresses  that  he  had  no  origin.  And 
why  Tathagata,  O  Subhuti  ?  It  expresses  the 
destruction  of  all  qualities.  And  why  Tathagata, 
O  Subhuti  ?  It  expresses  one  who  had  no  origin 
whatever.  And  why  this  ?  Because,  O  SubhAti, 
no-origin  is  the  highest  goal. 

'  And  whosoever,  O  Subhuti,  should  say  that,  by 
the  holy  and  fully  enlightened  Tathagata,  the  highest 

'  This  prophecy  is  supposed  to  have  been  addressed  by  Dipan- 
kara  to  6akyamuni,  before  he  had  become  a  Buddha. 


134  T"E    VAGRAA'A'HEDIKA 

perfect  knowledge  has  been  known,  he  would  speak 
an  untruth,  and  would  slander  me,  O  Subhuti,  with 
some  untruth  that  he  has  learned.  And  why  ? 
Because  there  is  no  such  thing-,  O  Subhuti,  as  has 
been  known  by  the  Tathagata  with  regard  to  the 
highest  perfect  knowledge.  And  in  that,  O  SubhQti, 
which  has  been  known  and  taught  by  the  Tathagata, 
there  is  neither  truth  nor  falsehood.  Therefore  the 
Tathagata  preaches :  "  All  things  are  Buddha- 
things."  And  why  ?  Because  what  was  preached 
by  the  Tathagata,  O  Subhuti,  as  all  things,  that 
was  preached  as  no-things;  and  therefore  all  things 
are  called  Buddha-things. 

'  Now,  O  Subhuti,  a  man  might  have  a  body  and 
a  large  body.'  The  venerable  Subhuti  said  :  '  That 
man  who  was  spoken  of  by  the  Tathagata  as  a  man 
with  a  body,  with  a  large  body,  he,  O  Bhagavat, 
was  spoken  of  by  the  Tathagata  as  without  a  body, 
and  therefore  he  is  called  a  man  with  a  body  and 
with  a  large  body.' 

Bhagavat  said :  '  So  it  is,  O  Subhuti ;  and  if  a 
Bodhisattva  were  to  say:  "  I  shall  deliver  all  beings," 
he  ought  not  to  be  called  a  Bodhisattva.  And 
why  ?  Is  there  anything,  O  Subhuti,  that  is  called 
a  Bodhisattva  ? '  Subhuti  said  :  '  Not  indeed,  Bha- 
gavat, there  is  nothing  which  is  called  a  Bodhisattva.' 
Bhagavat  said :  '  Those  who  were  spoken  of  as 
beings,  beings  indeed,  O  Subhuti,  they  were  spoken 
of  as  no-beings  by  the  Tathagata,  and  therefore  they 
are  called  beings.  Therefore  the  Tathdgata  says  : 
"All  beings  are  without  self,  all  beings  are  without 
life,  without  manhood  \  without  a  personality." 

'  Sans  croissancc,  Ilarlez;  see  Childers,  s.  v.  poriso. 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  I  35 

'  If,  O  Subhuti,  a  Bodhisattva  were  to  say:  "  I  shall 
create  numbers  of  worlds,"  he  would  say  what  is 
untrue.  And  why  ?  Because,  what  were  spoken  of 
as  numbers  of  worlds,  numbers  of  worlds  indeed, 
O  Subhtiti,  these  were  spoken  of  as  no-numbers 
by  the  Tathagata,  and  therefore  they  are  called 
numbers  of  worlds. 

'A  Bodhisattva,  O  Subhuti,  who  believes  that  all 
things  are  without  self,  that  all  things  are  without 
self,  he  has  faith,  he  is  called  a  noble-minded  Bodhi- 
sattva by  the  holy  and  fully  enlightened  Tatha- 
gata.'     {17) 

XVIII. 

Bhagavat  said:  'What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti,  has 
the  Tathagata  the  bodily  eye  ?  '  Subhuti  said  :  '  So  it 
is,  O  Bhagavat,  the  Tathagata  has  the  bodily  eye.' 

Bhagavat  said :  'What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti,  has 
the  Tathagata  the  heavenly  eye  ? '  Subhuti  said  :  '  So 
it  is,  O  Bhagavat,  the  Tathagata  has  the  heavenly  eye.' 

Bhagavat  said :  '  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti, 
has  the  Tathagata  the  eye  of  knowledge  ?  '  Subhuti 
said  :  '  So  it  is,  O  Bhagavat,  the  Tathagata  has  the 
eye  of  knowledge.' 

Bhagavat  said  :  '  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhiiti, 
has  the  Tathagata  the  eye  of  the  Law  ? '  Subhuti 
said  :  '  So  it  is,  O  Bhagavat,  the  Tathagata  has  the 
eye  of  the  Law.' 

Bhagavat  said :  '  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti, 
has  the  Tathagata  the  eye  of  Buddha  ? '  Subhiiti 
said :  'So  it  is,  O  Bhagavat,  the  Tathagata  has  the 
eye  of  Buddha.' 

Bhagavat  said :  '  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhtiti, 
as  many  grains  of  sand  as  there  are  in  the  great 
river  Gahga — were  they  preached  by  the  Tathagata 


136  THE    VAGRAA'A'//EDIKA 

as  grains  of  sand  ? '  SubhCiti  said :  'So  it  is,  O 
Bhagavat,  so  it  is,  O  Sugata,  they  were  preached  as 
grains  of  sand  by  the  Tathagata.'  Bhagavat  said  : 
'  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti,  if  there  were  as 
many  Gahga  rivers  as  there  are  grains  of  sand  in 
the  great  river  Gariga ;  and,  if  there  were  as  many 
worlds  as  there  are  orrains  of  sand  in  these,  would 
these  worlds  be  many  ? '  Subhuti  said  :  '  So  it  is, 
O  Bhagavat,  so  it  is,  O  Sugata,  these  worlds  would 
be  many.*  Bhagavat  said :  '  As  many  beings  as 
there  are  in  all  those  worlds,  I  know  the  manifold 
trains  of  thought  of  them  all.  And  why  ?  Because 
what  was  preached  as  the  train  of  thoughts,  the 
train  of  thoughts  indeed,  O  Subhuti,  that  was 
preached  by  the  Tathagata  as  no-train  of  thoughts, 
and  therefore  it  is  called  the  train  of  thouehts. 
And  why  ?  Because,  O  Subhuti,  a  past  thought  is 
not  perceived,  a  future  thought  is  not  perceived, 
and  the  present  thought  is  not  perceived.'     (18) 

XIX. 

'What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti,  if  a  son  or  a 
daughter  of  a  good  family  should  fill  this  sphere  of 
a  million  millions  of  worlds  with  the  seven  treasures, 
and  give  it  as  a  gift  to  holy  and  fully  enlightened 
Buddhas,  would  that  son  or  daughter  of  a  good 
family  produce  on  the  strength  of  this  a  large 
stock  of  merit  ? '  SubhCiti  said  :  '  Yes,  a  large  one.' 
Bhagavat  said  :  '  So  it  is,  Subhuti,  so  it  is ;  that  son 
or  daughter  of  a  good  family  would  produce  on  the 
strength  of  this  a  large  stock  of  merit,  immeasurable 
and  innumerable.  And  why  ?  Because  what  was 
preached  as  a  stock  of  merit,  a  stock  of  merit 
indeed,  O   Sul)huti,  that  was  preached  as   no-stock 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  137 

of  merit  by  the  Tathagata,  and  therefore  it  is  called 
a  stock  of  merit.  If,  O  Subhuti,  there  existed  a 
stock  of  merit,  the  Tathagata  would  not  have 
preached:  "A  stock  of  merit,  a  stock  of  merit  in- 
deed!"'    (19) 

XX. 

*  What  do  you  think  then,  O  SubhCiti,  is  a  Tatha- 
gata to  be  seen  (known)  by  the  shape  of  his  visible 
body  ? '  Subhuti  said  :  '  Not  indeed,  O  Bhagavat, 
a  Tathagata  is  not  to  be  seen  (known)  by  the  shape 
of  his  visible  body.  And  why  ?  Because,  what  was 
preached,  O  Bhagavat,  as  the  shape  of  the  visible 
body,  the  shape  of  the  visible  body  indeed,  that 
was  preached  by  the  Tathagata  as  no-shape  of  the 
visible  body,  and  therefore  it  is  called  the  shape  of 
the  visible  body.' 

Bhagavat  said :  '  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti, 
should  a  Tathagata  be  seen  (known)  by  the  pos- 
session of  signs  ? '  Subh<iti  said  :  '  Not  indeed,  O 
Bhagavat,  a  Tathagata  is  not  to  be  seen  (known)  by 
the  possession  of  signs.  And  why  ?  Because,  what 
was  preached  by  the  Tathagata  as  the  possession  of 
signs,  that  was  preached  as  no-possession  of  signs 
by  the  Tathagata,  and  therefore  it  is  called  the 
possession  of  signs.'     (20) 

XXI. 

Bhagavat  said  :  '  What  do  you  think,  O  Subhuti, 
does  the  Tathagata  think  in  this  wise  :  The  Law  has 
been  taught  by  me  ? '  Subhuti  said  :  '  Not  indeed, 
O  Bhagavat,  does  the  Tathagata  think  in  this  wise  : 
The  Law  has  been  taught  by  me.'  Bhagavat  said  : 
'  If  a  man  should  say  that  the  Law  has  been  taught 
by  the  Tathagata,  he  would  say  what  is  not  true  ;  he 


138  THE    VAGRAr^^EDIKA 

would  slander  me  with  untruth  which  he  has  learned. 
Antl  wh)-  ?  Because,  O  Subhuti,  it  is  said  the 
teachincr  of  the  Law,  the  teachincr  of  the  Law  indeed. 
O  Subhilti,  there  is  nothing  that  can  be  perceived 
by  the  name  of  the  teaching-  of  the  Law.'  • 

After  this,  the  venerable  Subhuti  spoke  thus  to 
the  Bhagavat :  '  Forsooth,  O  Bhagavat,  will  there 
be  any  beings  in  the  future,  in  the  last  time,  in  the 
last  moment,  in  the  last  500  years,  during  the  time 
of  the  decay  of  the  good  Law,  who,  when  they  have 
heard  these  very  Laws,  will  believe  ? '  Bhagavat 
said  :  '  These,  O  Subhuti,  are  neither  beincjs  nor  no- 
beings.  And  why  ?  Because,  O  Subhiiti,  those 
who  were  preached  as  beings,  beings  indeed,  they 
were  preached  as  no-beings  by  the  Tathagata,  and 
therefore  they  are  called  beings.'     (21) 

XXIL 

'  What  do  you  think  then,  O  SubhCiti,  is  there  any- 
thing which  has  been  known  b)'  the  Tathagata  in 
the  form  of  the  highest  perfect  knowledge  ? '  The 
venerable  Subhilti  said  :  '  Not  indeed,  O  Bhagavat, 
there  is  nothing,  O  Bhagavat,  that  has  been  known 
by  the  Tathagata  in  the  form  of  the  highest  perfect 
knowledge.'  Bhagavat  said  :  '  So  it  is,  SubhAti,  so 
it  is.  Even  the  smallest  thing  is  not  known  or 
perceived  there,  therefore  it  is  called  the  highest 
perfect  knowledge.'     (22) 

XXIIL 

'  Also,  Subhuti,  all  is  the  same  there,  there  is 
no  difference  there,  and  therefore  it  is  called  the 
highest  perfect  knowledge.  Free  from  self,  free 
from  being,  free  from  life,  free  from  personality,  that 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  I  39 

highest  perfect  knowledge  is  always  the  same,  and 
thus  known  with  all  good  things.  And  why  ?  Be- 
cause, what  were  preached  as  good  things,  .good 
things  indeed,  O  Subhuti,  they  were  preached  as 
no-things  by  the  Tathagata,  and  therefore  they  are 
called  good  things.'     (23) 

XXIV. 

'  And  if,  O  Subhuti,  a  woman  or  man,  putting 
together  as  many  heaps  of  the  seven  treasures  as 
there  are  Sumerus,  kings  of  mountains,  in  the  sphere 
of  a  milHon  millions  of  worlds,  should  give  them  as 
a  gift  to  holy  and  fully  enlightened  Tathagatas ; 
and,  if  a  son  or  a  daughter  of  a  good  family,  after 
taking  from  this  treatise  of  the  Law,  this  Pra^;/apara- 
mita,  one  Gatha  of  four  lines  only,  should  teach  it  to 
others,  then,  O  Subhuti,  compared  with  his  stock 
of  merit,  the  former  stock  of  merit  would  not 
come  to  the  one  hundredth  part,'  &c.  \  till  '  it  will 
not  bear  an  approach.'     (24) 

XXV. 

'  What  do  you  think  then,  O  Subhuti,  does  a 
Tathagata  think  in  this  wise  :  Beings  have  been  de- 
livered by  me  ?  You  should  not  think  so,  O  Subhuti. 
And  why  ?  Because  there  is  no  being,  O  Subhuti, 
that  has  been  delivered  by  the  Tathagata.  And, 
if  there  were  a  being,  O  Subhuti,  that  has  been 
delivered  by  the  Tathagata,  then  the  Tathagata 
would  believe  in  self,  believe  in  a  being,  believe  in 
a  living  being,  and  believe  in  a  person.  And  what 
is  called  a  belief  in  self,  O  Subhuti,  that  is  preached 

^  As  before,  in  chap.  .xvi. 


140  THE    VAGRAKKHEDIKA 

as  no-belief  by  the  Tath^gata.  And  this  is  learned 
by  children  and  ignorant  persons  ;  and  they  who 
were  preached  as  children  and  ignorant  persons, 
O  Subhuti,  were  preached  as  no-persons  by  the 
Tathagata,  and  therefore  they  are  called  children 
and  ignorant  persons.'     (25) 

XXVI. 

*  What  do  you  think  then,  O  Subhuti,  is  the 
Tathagata  to  be  seen  (known)  by  the  possession  of 
signs?'  SubhCiti  said:  'Not  indeed,  O  Bhagavat. 
So  far  as  I  know  the  meaning  of  the  preaching  of 
the  Bhagavat,  the  Tathagata  is  not  to  be  seen 
(known)  by  the  possession  of  signs.'  Bhagavat  said: 
'  Good,  good,  SubhCiti,  so  it  is,  Subhuti  ;  so  it  is, 
as  you  say;  a  Tathagata  is  not  to  be  seen  (known) 
by  the  possession  of  signs.  And  why  ?  Because, 
O  Subhuti,  if  the  Tathagata  were  to  be  seen  (known) 
by  the  possession  of  signs,  a  wheel-turning  king  also 
would  be  a  Tathagata  ^ ;  therefore  a  Tathagata  is 
not  to  be  seen  (known)  by  the  possession  of  signs.' 
The  venerable  Subhuti  spoke  thus  to  the  Bha- 
gavat :  '  As  I  understand  the  meaning  of  the 
preaching  of  the  Bhagavat,  a  Tathdgata  is  not  to 
be  seen  (known)  by  the  possession  of  signs.'  Then 
the  Bhagavat  at  that  moment  preached  these  two 
Gdthas : 

They  who  saw  me  by  form,  and   they  who  heard 

me  by  sound, 
They  engaged  in  false  endeavours,  will  not  see  me. 


'  This  prohahly  refers  to  the  ausjjicious  signs  discovered  in 
.Sakyaniuni  at  his  birth,  which  left  it  open  whether  lie  should  become 
a  king  or  a  iJuddha. 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  I4I 

A  Buddha  is  to  be  seen  (known)  from  the  Law ;  for 
the  Lords  (Buddhas)  have  the  Law-body; 

And  the  nature  of  the  Law  cannot  be  understood, 
nor  can  it  be  made  to  be  understood.     (26) 

XXVIL 

'What  do  you  think  then,  O  Subhuti,  has  the 
highest  perfect  knowledge  been  known  by  the 
Tathagata  through  the  possession  of  signs  ?  You 
should  not  think  so,  O  Subhuti.  And  why  ?  Be- 
cause, O  Subhuti,  the  highest  perfect  knowledge 
would  not  be  known  by  the  Tathagata  through  the 
possession  of  signs.  Nor  should  anybody,  O  Su- 
bhuti, say  to  you  that  the  destruction  or  annihila- 
tion of  any  thing  is  proclaimed  by  those  who  have 
entered  on  the  path  of  the  Bodhisattvas.'     (27) 

XXVIIL 

'  And  if,  O  Subhuti,  a  son  or  a  daughter  of  a  good 
family  were  to  fill  worlds  equal  to  the  number  of 
grains  of  sand  of  the  river  Gariga  with  the  seven 
treasures,  and  give  them  as  a  gift  to  holy  and 
fully  enlightened  Tathagatas  ;  and  if  a  Bodhisattva 
acquired  endurance  in  selfless  and  uncreated  things, 
then  the  latter  will  on  the  strength  of  this  produce 
a  larger  stock  of  merit,  immeasurable  and  innume- 
rable. 

*  But,  O  Subhuti,  a  stock  of  merit  should  not  be 
appropriated  by  a  noble-minded  Bodhisattva.'  The 
venerable  Subhuti  said  :  '  Should  a  stock  of  merit, 
O  Bhagavat,  not  be  appropriated  by  a  Bodhisattva  ?' 
Bhagavat  said  :  '  It  shoidd  be  appropriated,  O  Su- 
bhuti ;  it  should  not  be  appropriated  ;  and  therefore 
it  is  said  :   It  should  be  appropriated.'     (28) 


142  THE    VAGRAKKHEDIKA 

XXIX. 

*  And  again,  O  Subliiiti,  if  anybody  were  to  say 
that  the  Tathagata  goes,  or  comes,  or  stands,  or  sits, 
or  hes  down,  he,  O  Subhuti,  does  not  understand 
the  meaning  of  my  preaching.  And  why  ?  Because 
the  word  Tathagata  means  one  who  does  not  go 
to  anywhere,  and  does  not  come  from  anywhere  ; 
and  therefore  he  is  called  the  Tathagata  (truly 
come),  holy  and  fully  enlightened.'     (29) 

XXX. 

'  And  again,  O  Subhuti,  if  a  son  or  a  daughter  of 
a  good  family  were  to  take  as  many  worlds  as  there 
are  grains  of  earth-dust  in  this  sphere  of  a  million 
millions  of  worlds,  and  reduce  them  to  such  fine  dust 
as  can  be  made  with  immeasurable  strength,  like 
what  is  called  a  mass  of  the  smallest  atoms,  do  you 
think,  O  Subhuti,  would  that  be  a  mass  of  many 
atoms  ?  '  Subhuti  said  :  '  Yes,  Bhagavat,  yes,  Sugata, 
that  would  be  a  mass  of  many  atoms.  And  why  ? 
Because,  O  Bhagavat.  if  it  were  a  mass  of  many 
atoms,  Bhagavat  would  not  call  it  a  mass  of  many 
atoms.  And  why  ?  Because,  what  was  preached  as 
a  mass  of  many  atoms  by  the  Tathagata,  that  was 
preached  as  no-mass  of  atoms  by  the  Tathagata ; 
and  therefore  it  is  called  a  mass  of  many  atoms. 
And  what  was  preached  by  the  Tathagata  as  the 
sphere  of  a  million  millions  of  worlds,  that  was 
preached  by  the  Tathagata  as  no-sphere  of  worlds ; 
and  therefore  it  is  called  the  sphere  of  a  million 
millions  of  worlds.  And  why  ?  Because,  C)  Bha- 
gavat, if  there  were  a  sphere  of  worlds,  there  would 
exist  a  belief  in  matter ;  and  what  was  preached 
as   a  belief  in    matter   b)-  the  Tathagata,   that  was 


OR    DIAMOND-CUTTER.  I  43 

preached  as  no-belief  by  the  Tath^gata ;  and  diere- 
fore  it  is  called  a  belief  in  matter.'  Bhagavat  said  : 
'And  a  belief  in  matter  itself,  O  SubhCiti,  is  un- 
mentionable and  inexpressible  ;  it  is  neither  a  thing 
nor  no- thing,  and  this  is  known  by  children  and 
ignorant  persons.'     (30) 

XXXI. 

'  And  why  ?  Because,  O  Subhuti,  if  a  man  were 
to  say  that  belief  in  self,  belief  in  a  being,  belief  in 
life,  belief  in  personality  had  been  preached  by  the 
Tathagata,  would  he  be  speaking  truly  ? '  Subhuti 
said  :  '  Not  indeed,  Bhagavat,  not  indeed,  Sugata ; 
he  would  not  be  speaking  truly.  And  why  ?  Because, 
O  Bhagavat,  what  was  preached  by  the  Tathagata 
as  a  belief  in  self,  that  was  preached  by  the  Tatha- 
gata as  no-belief;  therefore  it  is  called  belief  in 
self.' 

Bhaoravat  said :  '  Thus  then,  O  Subhuti,  are  all 
things  to  be  perceived,  to  be  looked  upon,  and  to 
be  believed  by  one  who  has  entered  on  the  path  of 
the  Bodhisattvas.  And  in  this  wise  are  they  to  be 
perceived,  to  be  looked  upon,  and  to  be  believed, 
that  a  man  should  believe  neither  in  the  idea  of 
a  thing  nor  in  the  idea  of  a  no-thing.  And  why  ? 
Because,  by  saying :  The  idea  of  a  thing,  the  idea 
of  a  thing  indeed,  it  has  been  preached  by  the 
Tathagata  as  no-idea  of  a  thing.'     (31) 

XXXII. 

'  And,  O  Subhiiti,  if  a  noble-minded  Bodhisattva 
were  to  fill  immeasurable  and  innumerable  spheres 
of  worlds  with  the  seven  treasures,  and  give  them 
as  a  gift  to  holy  and  fully  enlightened  Tathagatas ; 


144  '^"^    VAGRA^A'^EDIKA. 

and  if  a  son  or  a  daughter  of  a  good  family,  after 
taking  from  this  treatise  of  the  Law,  this  Pra^?2a- 
paramita,  one  Gatha  of  four  Hnes  only,  should  learn 
it,  repeat  it,  understand  it,  and  fully  explain  it  to 
others,  then  the  latter  would  on  the  strength  of 
this  produce  a  larger  stock  of  merit,  immeasurable 
and  innumerable.  And  how  should  he  explain  it  ? 
As  in  the  sky: 

Stars,  darkness,  a  lamp,  a  phantom,  dew,  a  bubble. 
A  dream,  a  flash  of  lightning,  and  a  cloud — thus 

we  should  look   upon   the   world  (all  that  was 

made). 

Thus  he  should  explain  ;  therefore  it  is  said  :  He 
should  explain.' 

Thus  spoke  the  Bhagavat  enraptured.  The 
elder  Subhuti,  and  the  friars,  nuns,  the  faithful  lay- 
men and  women,  and  the  Bodhisattvas  also,  and  the 
whole  world  of  gods,  men,  evil  spirits  and  fairies, 
praised  the  preaching  of  the  Bhagavat.     (32) 

Thus  is  finished  the  Diamond-cutter,  the 
blessed  Pra;^;7aparamita. 


THE    LARGER 

PRAGyVA-PARAMITA 
HA'/DAYA-SUTRA. 


ivA 


THE    LARGER 

pragtv^A-paramitA- 

Hi^/DAYA-StJTRA. 

Adoration  to  the  Omniscient  ! 

This  I  heard :  At  one  time  the  Bhagavat  dwelt 
at  Ka.g'agriha,  on  the  hill  Gr/dhrakii/a,  together 
with  a  large  number  of  Bhikshus  and  a  large 
number  of  Bodhisattvas. 

At  that  time  the  Bhagavat  was  absorbed  in  a 
meditation,  called  Gambhiravasambodha.  And  at 
the  same  time  the  great  Bodhisattva  Aryavalokite- 
^vara,  performing  his  study  in  the  deep  Pra^;H- 
paramita,  thought  thus :  '  There  are  the  five  Skan- 
dhas,  and  those  he  (the  Buddha  ?)  considered  as 
something  by  nature  empty.' 

Then  the  venerable  ^'ariputra,  through  Buddha's 
power,  thus  spoke  to  the  Bodhisattva  Aryavalokite- 
5vara :  *  If  the  son  or  daughter  of  a  family  wishes 
to  perform  the  study  in  the  deep  Pra^;'^aparamita, 
how  is  he  to  be  taught  ? ' 

On  this  the  great  Bodhisattva  Aryavalokite^vara 
thus  spoke  to  the  venerable  6ariputra  :  '  If  the  son 
or  daughter  of  a  family  wishes  to  perform  the  study 
in  the  deep  Pra^?1aparamita,  he  must  think  thus  : 

'  There  are  five  Skandhas,  and  these  he  considered 
as  by  their  nature  empty.     Form  is  emptiness,  and 

*  L  2 


I4S       LARGER    PRAGiVA-PARAMITA-H/27DAYA-Sl)TRA. 

emptiness  indeed  is  form.  Emptiness  is  not  different 
from  form,  form  is  not  different  from  emptiness. 
What  is  form  that  is  emptiness,  what  is  emptiness 
that  is  form.  Thus  perception,  name,  conception, 
and  knowledge  also  are  emptiness.  Thus,  O  ^'ari- 
putra,  all  things  have  the  character  of  emptiness, 
they  have  no  beginning,  no  end,  they  are  faultless 
and  not  faultless,  they  are  not  imperfect  and  not 
perfect.  Therefore,  O  ^'ariputra,  here  in  this  empti- 
ness there  is  no  form,  no  perception,  no  name,  no 
concept,  no  knowledge.  No  eye,  ear,  nose,  tongue, 
body,  and  mind.  No  form,  sound,  smell,  taste, 
touch,  and  objects.  There  is  no  eye,'  &c.,  till  we 
come  to  '  there  is  no  mind,  no  objects,  no  mind- 
knowledp-e.  There  is  no  knowledije,  no  ionorance, 
no  destruction  (of  ignorance),'  till  we  come  to  '  there 
is  no  decay  and  death,  no  destruction  *of  decay  and 
death  ;  there  are  not  (the  Four  Truths,  viz.)  that 
there  is  pain,  origin  of  pain,  stoppage  of  pain,  and 
the  path  to  it.  There  is  no  knowledge,  no  obtain- 
ing, no  not-obtaining  of  Nirvawa.  Therefore,  O 
vS^riputra,  as  there  is  no  obtaining  (of  Nirvawa), 
a  man  who  has  approached  the  Pra^;7aparamiti  of 
the  Bodhisattvas,  dwells  (for  a  time)  enveloped  in 
consciousness.  But  when  the  envelopment  of  con- 
sciousness has  been  annihilated,  then  he  becomes 
free  of  all  fear,  bc)ond  the  reach  of  change,  enjoy- 
ing final  Nirva;m. 

'All  Buddhas  of  the  past,  present,  and  future,  after 
approaching  the  Prai,'77aparamita,  have  awoke  to 
the  highest  perfect  knowledge. 

'Therefore  we  ought  to  know  the  great  verse  of 
the  Pra^^^y/aparamitri,  the  verse  of  the  great  wisdom, 
tlio   unsurpassed   verse,   the   verse   which   appeases 


LARGER    PRAGiVA-PARAMITA-H/27DAYA-sCTRA.        1 49 

all  pain — it  is  truth,  because  it  is  not  false  ^ — the 
verse  proclaimed  in  the  Pra^;7aparamita  -  :  "  O 
wisdom,  gone,  gone,  gone  to  the  other  shore,  landed 
at  the  other  shore,  Svaha  !  " 

'  Thus,  O  ^'ariputra,  should  a  Bodhisattva  teach 
in  the  study  of  the  deep  Pra^;^aparamita.' 

Then  when  the  Bhao^avat  had  risen  from  that 
meditation,  he  gave  his  approval  to  the  venerable 
Bodhisattv^a  Avalokite^vara,  saying :  '  Well  done, 
well  done,  noble  son !  So  it  is,  noble  son.  So  in- 
deed must  this  study  of  the  deep  Pra^;/aparamita 
be  performed.  As  it  has  been  described  by  thee, 
it  is  applauded  by  Arhat  Tathagatas.'  Thus  spoke 
Bhagavat  with  joyful  mind.  And  the  venerable 
^'ariputra,  and  the  honourable  Bodhisattva  Avalo- 
kitei"vara,  aud  the  whole  assembly,  and  the  world 
of  gods,  men,  demons,  and  fairies  praised  the  speech 
of  the  Bhagavat. 

Here  ends  the  Pra^waparamitahr/dayastatra. 


^  It  is  truth,  not  falsehood,  W  text. 

^  Fit  for  obtaining  Pra^;7aparamita,  W  text. 


THE   SMALLER 

P  R  A  G  NA-F  A  R  A  M  I  T  A 
H^/DAYA-SUTRA. 


THE    SMALLER 

P  R  A  G  yy  A- P  A  R  A  M  I  T  A- 

HAYDAYA-SUTRA. 

Adoration  to  the  Omniscient  ! 

The  venerable  Bodhisattva  Avalokite^vara,  per- 
forming his  study  in  the  deep  Pra^;^aparamita 
(perfection  of  wisdom),  thought  thus  :  '  There  are 
the  five  Skandhas,  and  these  he  considered  as  by 
their  nature  empty  (phenomenal).' 

'  O  ^'ariputra/  he  said,  '  form  here  is  emptiness, 
and  emptiness  indeed  is  form.  Emptiness  is  not 
different  from  form,  form  is  not  different  from 
emptiness.  What  is  form  that  is  emptiness,  what 
is  emptiness  that  is  form.' 

'  The  same  applies  to  perception,  name,  concep- 
tion, and  knowledge.' 

'  Here,  O  6'ariputra,  all  things  have  the  character 
of  emptiness,  they  have  no  beginning,  no  end,  they 
are  faultless  and  not  faultless,  they  are  not  imperfect 
and  not  perfect.  Therefore,  O  .Sariputra,  in  this 
emptiness  there  is  no  form,  no  perception,  no  name, 
no  concepts,  no  knowledge.  No  eye,  ear,  nose, 
tongue,  body,  mind.  No  form,  sound,  smell,  taste, 
touch,  objects.' 

*  There  is  no  eye,'  &c.,  till  we  come  to  '  there  is 
no  mind.' 


154      SMALLER    rRAGi^A-rARAMITA-Ii;^DAYA-st}TRA. 

(What  is  left  out  here  are  the  eighteen  Dhdtus 
or  aggregates,  viz.  eye,  form,  vision;  ear,  sound, 
hearing;  nose,  odour,  smelling;  tongue,  flavour, 
tasting ;  body,  touch,  feeling ;  mind,  objects,  thought.) 

'  There  is  no  knowledge,  no  ignorance,  no  destruc- 
tion of  knowledge,  no  destruction  of  ignorance,'  &c., 
till  we  come  to  '  there  is  no  decay  and  death,  no 
destruction  of  decay  and  death ;  there  are  not  (the 
four  truths,  viz.  that  there)  is  pain,  origin  of  pain, 
stoppage  of  pain,  and  the  path  to  it.  There  is  no 
knowledge,  no  obtaining  (of  Nirva;/a).' 

'  A  man  who  has  approached  the  Pra^;Hparamita 
of  the  Bodhisattva  dwells  enveloped  in  conscious- 
ness '.  But  when  the  envelopment  of  consciousness 
has  been  annihilated,  then  he  becomes  free  of  all 
fear,  beyond  the  reach  of  change,  enjoying  final 
Nirv^awa.' 

'  All  Buddhas  of  the  past,  present,  and  future, 
after  approaching  the  Pra^;7aparamita,  have  awoke 
to  the  highest  perfect  knowledge.' 

'  Therefore  one  ought  to  know  the  great  verse 
of  the  Pra^;7aparamita,  the  verse  of  the  great 
wisdom,  the  unsurpassed  verse,  the  peerless  verse, 
which  appeases  all  pain — it  is  truth,  because  it  is 
not  false — the  verse  proclaimed  in  the  Pra^^'/Hpara- 
mitd :  "  O  wisdom,  gone,  gone,  gone  to  the  other 
shore,  landed  at  the  other  shore,  Svaha !  "  ' 

Thus  ends  the  heart  of  the  Pra^'waparamita. 
'  See  Childers,  s. v.  /it tarn. 


INDEX    OF    NAMES    AND    SUBJECTS 

IN   THE   YAGRAKA^I/EDlKk  AND   THE   PRACiVA- 
PARA]\nTA-Hi?/DAYA-SUTRA. 


Anagamin,  one  who  does  not  return 

at  all,  page  120,  note  2  ;   121. 
AnathapiWada,  iii. 
Arhat,  1 20,  n.  2  ;  121  seq. ;  A.  Tatha- 

gatas,  1^49.^ 
Arya-pra^;7a-paramita,  perfection  of 

wisdom,  III. 
Aryavalokitejvara,  N.  of  a  Bodhi- 

sattva,  147;   149;   153. 
Atoms,  142. 
Avalokitejvara,    see   Aryavalokitej- 

vara. 

Being,  term  of,  113  seq.;    belief  in, 

idea  of  a  b.,  117,  &c.  &c. ;  see 

Self,  134. 
Bhagavat  (Buddha),   iii,  &c.    &c. ; 

147;  149- 
Bhikshus,  1 1 1  seq. ;   144;   147. 
Bodhi,  highest  knowledge,  1 1 1,  n.  4  ; 

130;  131. 
Bodhisattvas,  iii,&c.;  126;    128; 

134    seq.;     147    seqq.  ;     154; 

knowledge  of  B.,  1 30  ;  path  of 

the  B.,  132  ;  141  ;  143. 
Brahman  world,  120,  n.  2. 
Buddha,  116  seq.;    125,  n.  i  ;    147; 

qualities  of  B.,  120  ;    eye  of  B., 

135;    B.  to  be  seen  from  the 

Law,  141  ;  many  Buddhas,  117; 

119;    127 ;     131 ;     136;    148; 

154;  knowledge  of  B.,  131. 
Buddha-eye,  117 ;  129;   130. 
Buddha-knowledge,  117  ;  129;  130; 

131. 
Buddha-things,  134. 

Cause,  idea  of,  114  seq. 

Demons,  see  Spirits. 

Dhatus,  eighteen  aggregates,  154. 


Dipahkara,  the  Tathagata,  122  ; 
131  ;  132  seq. 

Emptiness,  147  seq. ;  153. 

Eye  (bodily,  heavenly,  &c.),  135. 

Fairies,  144  ;  149. 

Faith,  117;  135. 

Four  Truths,  148  ;   154. 

Gambhiravasambodha,    a     kind    of 

meditation,  147. 
Gatha  of  four  lines,  119  ;   124;   126; 

139;     144;     two   Gathas,   140 

seq. 
Gaya-kajyapa,  in,  n.  3. 
Geta,  the  grove  of,  in. 
Gods,  130  ;   144  ;  149. 
Gr/dhraku/a,  N.  of  a  hill,  147. 

Hero,  signs  of  a,  125. 

Holy  persons  (aryapudgala),  118. 

Idea  (saw^wa),  117;  126  seq. ;  128; 
idea  of  a  thing,  and  no-idea, 
143. 

A'aitya,  holy  shrine,  124  ;   130. 
Kalihga,  king  of,  127. 
Kalira^an  or  "nr/pa,  127,  n.  1. 
Knowledge,    highest   perfect,    118; 

119  ;  128  ;  132  seqq.  ;   i38seq. ; 

141  ;   148  ;  154;  eye  of  k.,  135; 

there  is  no  k.,  148. 
Kshantivadin,  Rishi,  128. 

Law,  decay  of  the  good  L.,  116; 
127;  131;  138;  teaching  of  the 
L.,  118;  138;  treatise  of  the  L., 
119;  124;  126;  129  seq.;  eye 
of  the  L.,  135  ;  Law  taught  by 


I  S6  VAGRAA'A'^EDIKA  AND    PRAGi^A-PARAMITAS. 


the  Tathagata,   137;     Buddha 

seen  from  the  L.,  141. 
Law-body,  141. 
Laymen  and  women,  144, 

Matter,  belief  in,  142  seq. 
RIaudgalyayana,  iii,n.  3. 
Men,   gods,   and   evil   sj)irits,    130; 

144  ;  149. 
Merit,  stock  of,  114,  &c.  &c. 

Nadi-kajyapa,  iii,  n.  3. 

Nirvawa,  1 16  note  ;  148  ;  154  ;  world 

of  N.,   114;     132  ;     120,  n.  2  ; 

path  leading  to  N.,  126  ;  130. 
No-origin  the  highest  goal,  133. 
Nuns,  144. 

Parama-paramita,  127, 

Paramita,  127. 

Person,  personality,  1 1 7,  &c.  &c.  ; 
see  Self, 

Pra^wa-paramita  (transcendent  wis- 
dom), 124  seq.;  139;  144; 
147  seqq.;   153  seq. 

Prascna^^it,  1 1 1,  n.  i. 

Preceptor,  the  wise,  124. 

Quality  (dharma),  idea  of,  1 1 7 ;  quali- 
ties of  Buddha,  120. 

R%agr/ha,  147. 

Sakr/dagamin,   a  man  who  returns 

once,  120  seq. 
5akyamuni,  133;   140,  n.  i. 
iariputra,  III,  n.  3;  147  seqq. ;   153. 


Self,  idea  of  and  belief  in  a,  117  ;  120 
seq.;  127  seq.;  130;  132;  138; 
139  ;  '43  ;  s'l  things  are  with- 
out self,  134. 

Selfhood,  123  ;   125. 

Signs,  possession  of,  115  ;  137;  140; 
141;  thirty-two  signs  of  a  hero, 
125. 

Skandhas,  five,  147  ;  153. 

Spirits,  evil,  130  ;    144;   149. 

5ravasti,  1 1  r  seq. 

Srota-apanna,  a  man  who  has  ob- 
tained the  fust  grade  of  sancti- 
fication,  116  note;  120. 

Srota-apatti,  120. 

Subhuti,  112,  &c.  &c. 

Sudatta,  1 1 1,  n.  2. 

Sugata  (Buddha),  112;  119;  123; 
125;  126;  143. 

Suraeru,  king  of  mountains,  123; 
plur.,  139. 

Tathagata,  112,  &c.  &c. ;  the  name 
of  T.,  133;  142;  ArhatTatha- 
gatas,  149. 

Teacher,  i.  e.  Buddha,  124. 

Thoughts,  train  of,  136. 

Treasures,  seven,  119;  123;  136; 
139;  141  ;  M3- 

Uruvilva-kajyapa,  iii,  n.  3. 

Wheel-turning  king,  140. 

Worlds,  sphere  of  a  million  millions 

of,  119;  125;   136;  139;   142; 

numbers  of  worlds,  122  ;    134 

seq.;   143. 


INDEX   OF  SANSKRIT   WORDS, 

CHIEFLY  THOSE  EXPLAINED  IN  THE  NOTES. 


arawaviharin,  dwelling  in  virtue,  page 
i2r,  note  i. 

atmabhava,  selfhood,  life,  125,  n.  i. 
ara«ya-viharin,  living  in  the  forest, 

121,  n.  I. 
Aryapudgala,  one  who  has  entered 

on  the  path  leading  to  Nirvawa, 

118,  n.  2. 

eka/Jittaprasada,  117,  n,  i. 

Kr/tabhaktakr/tya,  112,  n.  2. 
kshanti,  endurance,  127. 

>&ittaprasada,  faith  in  Buddha,  117, 
n.  I. 

dharma,   quality,  117;    thing,  118; 
122  ;  125  ;  128  ;  132  ;  particular 


state,  120;  an  individual  being, 
121. 

nivas,  112,  n.  i. 

paribhuta,   overcome,   despised   (?), 

^  131,  n.  I. 
parindita,  instructed,  113,  n.  r. 
pajHdbhakta,  112,  n.  3. 
piw^apata,  1 12,  n.  3. 
puwyaskandha,  119,  n.  2. 
purvahwakalasamaye    nivasya,     112, 

n.  I. 
pra^wapta,  112,  n.  4. 
prabhavita,  power,  18,  n.  3. 

ra«a,  strife,  sin,  121,  n.  i. 

jastr/,  teacher  =  Buddha,  124,  n.  2. 

sawskr/ta,  perfect  (?),  118,  n.  3. 
saw^wa,  idea,  117. 


AMITAYUR-DHYANA- 
SUTRA, 

THE  StTRA  OF   THE   MEDITATION   ON  AMITAYUS. 


MEDITATION 

ON 

BUDDHA  AMITAYUS'. 

Part  I. 

§  I.  Thus  it  was  heard  by  me  :  At  one  time 
the  Buddha  dwelt  in  Ra^agr/ha,  on  the  mountain 
Gr/dhraku/a,  with  a  large  assembly  of  Bhikshus 
and  with  thirty-two  thousands  of  Bodhisattvas  ; 
with  Ma;7^ui-ri,  Prince  of  the  Law-,  at  the  head  of 
the  assembly. 

{  2.  At  that  time,  in  the  great  city  of  Ra^ag^'z'ha 
there  was  a  prince,  the  heir-apparent,  named  A^a- 
ta5"atru.  He  listened  to  the  wicked  counsel  of 
Devadatta  and  other  friends  and  forcibly  arrested 
Bimbisara  his  father,  the  king,  and  shut  him  up  by 
himself  in  a  room  with  seven  walls,  proclaiming  to 
all  the  courtiers  that  no  one  should  approach  (the 
king).      The  chief  consort  of  the  king,  Vaidehi  by 

^  Nanjio's  Catalogue  of  Tripi/aka,  No.  198;  translated  into 
Chinese  a.  d.  424,  by  Kalaya^as,  a  ^ramawa  from  India. 

^  Sanskrit  Kumarabhijta,  '  prince '  or  '  princely,'  but  Chinese 
has  '  prince  of  the  law ; '  according  to  the  commentator,  fC-ko, 
he  was  called  so  because  he  was  (skilled  in)  converting  men  by 
(teaching)  the  Law.  K'-k'6  seems  to  have  understood  that  Ma«- 
gnsn  was  not  a  royal  prince,  but  the  name  KumarabhCita  was  given 
him  as  an  honorific  title.  Max  I\I tiller,  '  the  prince '  (p.  350, 
vol.  ii.  Selected  Essays)  ;  Kern,  '  the  prince  royal, '  but  he  gives  an 
alternative  'still  a  youth'  (p.  4,  Saddharmapuz/f/arika). 

[49]  *  M 


i62  amitayur-dhyana-sOtra,  §3. 

name,  was  true  and  faithful  to  her  lord,  the  king. 
She  supported  him  in  this  wise  :  having  purified 
herself  by  bathing  and  washing,  she  anointed  her 
body  with  honey  and  ghee  mixed  with  corn-flour, 
and  she  concealed  the  juice  of  grapes  in  the 
various  garlands  she  wore  (in  order  to  give  him 
food  without  being  noticed  by  the  warder).  As 
she  stole  in  and  made  an  offering  to  him,  he  was 
able  to  eat  the  flour  and  to  drink  the  juice  (of 
grapes).  Then  he  called  for  water  and  rinsed  his 
mouth.  That  done,  the  king  stretched  forth  his 
folded  hands  towards  the  Mount  Gr/dhraku/a  and 
worshipped  duly  and  respectfully  the  World- 
Honoured  One,  who  at  that  time  abode  there. 
And  he  uttered  the  following  prayer  :  '  Mahamaud- 
galy^yana  is  my  friend  and  relative  ;  let  him,  I  pray, 
feel  compassion  towards  me,  and  come  and  commu- 
nicate to  me  the  eight  prohibitive  precepts  ^  (of 
I5uddha).'  On  this,  Mahamaudgalyayana  at  once 
appeared  before  the  king,  coming  with  a  speed  equal 
to  the  flight  of  a  falcon  or  an  eagle,  and  communi- 
cated to  him  the  eight  precepts. 

Day  after  day  did  he  come.  The  World- 
Honoured  One  sent  also  his  worthy  disciple  Piirwa 
to  preach  the  Law  to  the  king.  Thus  a  period  of 
three  weeks  passed  by.  The  king  showed  by  his 
countenance  that  he  was  happy  and  contented  when 
he  had  an  opportunity  of  hearing  the  Law  as  well  as 
of  enjoying  the  honey  and  flour. 

{  3.  At  that  time,  A^dta^atru  asked  the  warder 


'  According  lo  ihc  commentator,  Slian-tao,  '  killing,  stealing, 
a  'ulicry,  lying,  drinking,  applying  ointment,  &c.,  music,  and  using 
ornamented  chairs,  &c.' 


§3.  MEDITATION    ON    BUDDHA    AMITAYUS.  163 

of  the  gate  whether  his  father  was  yet  aHve.  On 
this,  the  warder  answered  him  :  *  O  Exalted  king,  the 
chief  consort  (of  thy  father)  brought  (food)  and  pre- 
sented it  to  him  by  anointing  her  body  with  honey 
and  flour  and  filHng  her  garlands  with  the  juice  (of 
grapes),  and  the  vSrama^zas,  Mahamaudgalyayana 
and  Pur/^a,  approached  the  king  through  the  sky  in 
order  to  preach  the  Law  to  him.  It  is,  O  king, 
impossible  to  prevent  them  coming.'  When  the 
prince  heard  this  answer  his  indignation  arose 
against  his  mother :  '  My  mother,'  he  cried,  '  is, 
indeed,  a  rebel,  for  she  was  found  in  company 
with  that  rebel.  Wicked  people  are  those  ^'rama^zas, 
and  it  is  their  art  of  spells  causing  illusion  and 
delusion  that  delayed  the  death  of  that  wicked  king 
for  so  many  days.'  Instantly  he  brandished  his 
sharp  sword,  intending  to  slay  his  mother.  At  that 
moment,  there  intervened  a  minister  named  A'an- 
draprabha,  who  was  possessed  of  great  wisdom  and 
intelligence,  and  6^iva  (a  famous  physician).  They 
saluted  the  prince  and  remonstrated  with  him, 
saying  :  '  We,  ministers,  O  Great  king,  heard  that 
since  the  beginning  of  the  kalpas  there  had  been 
several  wicked  kings,  even  to  the  number  of  eighteen 
thousand,  who  killed  their  own  fathers,  covet- 
ing the  throne  of  (their  respective)  kingdoms,  as 
mentioned  in  the  Sutra  of  the  discourse  of  the 
Veda  \  Yet  never  have  we  heard  of  a  man  killing 
his  mother,  though  he  be  void  of  virtue.  Now,  if 
thou,  O  king,  shouldst  dare  to  commit  such  a  deadly 
sin,  thou  wouldst  bring  a  stain  upon  the  blood  of 
the  Kshatriyas  (the  kingly  race).     We  cannot  even 

^  This  is  non-Buddhistic,  according  to  ShSn-tao. 
*  M  2 


l64  AMITAVUR-DHYANA-S^TRA,  §4. 

bear  to  hear  of  it.  Thou  art  indeed  a  A'a7^r/ala 
(the  lowest  race)  ;  we  shall  not  stay  here  w  ith 
thee.*  After  this  speech,  the  two  great  ministers 
retired  stepping  backward,  each  with  his  hand  placed 
on  his  sword.  A^ata^atru  M-as  then  frightened, 
and  greatly  afraid  of  them,  and  asked  Civa, 
saying:  'Wilt  thou  not  be  friendly  to  me?'  In 
reply  6"iva  said  to  him  :  '  Do  not  then,  O  Great 
king,  by  any  means  think  of  injuring  thy  mother.' 
On  hearing  this,  the  prince  repented  and  sought 
for  mercy,  and  at  once  laid  down  his  sword  and  did 
his  mother  no  hurt.  He  finally  ordered  the  officers 
of  the  inner  chambers  to  put  the  queen  in  a  hidden 
palace  and  not  to  allow  her  to  come  out  again, 

§  4.  When  Vaidehi  was  thus  shut  up  in  retire- 
ment she  became  afflicted  by  sorrow  and  distress. 
She  began  to  do  homage  to  Buddha  from  afar,  look- 
ing towards  the  Mount  G;Vdhraku/a.  She  uttered 
the  following  words  :  '  O  Tath^gata  !  World- 
Honoured  One!  In  former  times  thou  hast  con- 
stantly sent  Ananda  to  me  for  enquiry  and  conso- 
lation.      I    am    now    in   sorrow  and   grief      Thou, 

0  World-Honoured  One,  art  majestic  and  exalted  ; 
in  no  way  shall  I  be  able  to  see  thee.     Wilt  thou, 

1  pray  thee,  command  Mahimaudgalyayana  and 
thy  honoured  disciple,  Ananda,  to  come  and  have 
an  interview  with  me  ? '  After  this  speech,  she 
grieved  and  wept,  shedding  tears  like  a  shower 
of  rain.  Before  she  raised  her  head  from  doing 
homage  to  the  distant  Buddha,  the  World-Honoured 
One  knew  what  Vaidehi  was  wishing  in  her  mind, 
though  he  was  on  the  Mount  Gr/dhrakiVa.  There- 
fore, he  instantly  ordered  Mahamaudgalyayana  and 
Ananda    to  go    to    her  through    the    sky.       Buddha 


§5.       MEDITATION  ON  BUDDHA  AMITAYUS.      1 65 

himself  disappeared  from  that  mountain  and  appeared 
in  the  royal  palace. 

When  the  queen  raised  her  head  as  she  fmishcd 
homage  to  Buddha,  she  saw  before  her  the  World- 
Honoured  Buddha  6'akyamuni,  whose  body  was 
purple  gold  in  colour,  sitting  on  a  lotus-flower  which 
consists  of  a  hundred  jewels,  with  Mahamaudgalya- 
yana  attending  on  his  left,  and  with  Ananda  on  his 
right.  .Sakra  (Indra),  Brahman,  and  other  gods  that 
protect  the  world  were  seen  in  the  midst  of  the  sky, 
everywhere  showering  heavenly  flowers  with  which 
they  made  offerings  to  Buddha  in  their  worship. 
Vaidehi,  at  the  sight  of  Buddha  the  World-Honoured 
One,  took  off  her  garlands  and  prostrated  herself  on 
the  ground,  crying,  sobbing,  and  speaking  to  Buddha  : 
'  O  World-Honoured  One !  what  former  sin  of 
mine  has  produced  such  a  wicked  son  ?  And 
again,  O  Exalted  One,  from  what  cause  and  cir- 
cumstances hast  thou  such  an  affinity  (by  blood  and 
religion)  with  Devadatta  (Buddha's  wicked  cousin 
and  once  his  disciple)?' 

§  5.  '  My  only  prayer,'  she  continued,  '  is  this  : 
O  World-Honoured  One,  mayst  thou  preach  to 
me  in  detail  of  all  the  places  where  there  is  no 
sorrow  or  trouble,  and  where  I  ought  to  go  to  be 
born  anew.  I  am  not  satisfied  with  this  world  of 
depravities  \  with  6^ambudvipa  (India)  -,  which  is 
full  of  hells,  full  of  hungry  spirits  (pretas),  and  of  the 
brute  creation.  In  this  world  of  depravities,  there 
is  many  an  assemblage  of  the  wicked.      May  I  not 


'  For  five  depravities  vide  Smaller   Sukhavati,  §  18;    Saddhar- 
mapu«</ar5ka  by  Kern,  p.  58,  §  140  note. 

2  But  Japanese  Buddhists  take  this  in  a  wider  sense. 


1 66  amitayur-dhyana-sOtra,  §6. 

hear,  I  pray,  the  voice  of  the  wicked  in  the  future  ; 
and  may  I  not  see  any  wicked  person. 

'  Now  I  throw  my  five  h'mbs  down  to  the  ground 
before  thee,  and  seek  for  thy  mercy  by  confessing 
my  sins.  I  pray  for  this  only  that  the  Sun-Hke 
Buddha  may  instruct  me  how  to  meditate  on  a 
world  wherein  all  actions  are  pure.'  At  that 
moment,  the  World-Honoured  One  flashed  forth 
a  golden  ray  from  between  his  eyebrows.  It 
extended  to  all  the  innumerable  worlds  of  the  ten 
quarters.  On  its  return  the  ray  rested  on  the  top 
of  Buddha's  head  and  transformed  itself  into  a 
golden  pillar  just  like  the  Mount  Sumeru,  wherein 
the  pure  and  admirable  countries  of  the  Buddhas  in 
the  ten  quarters  appeared  all  at  once  illuminated. 

One  was  a  country  consisting  of  seven  jewels, 
another  was  a  country  all  full  of  lotus-flowers  ;  one 
was  like  the  palace  of  Mahei^vara  Deva  (god  ^'iva), 
another  was  like  a  mirror  of  crystal,  with  the  coun- 
tries in  the  ten  quarters  reflected  therein.  There 
were  innumerable  countries  like  these,  resplendent, 
gorgeous,  and  delightful  to  look  upon.  All  were 
meant  for  Vaidehi  to  see  {and  choose  from). 

Thereupon  Vaidehi  again  spoke  to  Buddha :  '  O 
World- Honoured  One,  although  all  other  Buddha 
countries  are  pure  and  radiant  with  light,  I  should, 
nevertheless,  wish  myself  to  be  born  in  the  realm 
of  Buddha  Amitayus  (or  Amitdbha\  in  the  world  of 
Highest  Happiness  (Sukhrivati).  Now  I  simply 
pray  thee,  O  World- Honoured  One,  to  teach  me 
how  to  concentrate  my  thought  so  as  to  obtain 
a  right  vision  (of  that  country).' 

§  6,  Thereupon  the  World-Honoured  One  gently 
smiled   upon  her,   and  rays  of   five  colours   issued 


§7.       MEDITATION  ON  BUDDHA  AMITAYUS.      1 6/ 

forth  out  of  his  mouth,  each  ray  shining  as  far  as 
the  head  of  kine  Bimbisara, 

At  that  moment,  the  mental  vision  of  that  exaked 
king  was  perfectly  clear  though  he  was  shut  up  in 
lonely  retirement,  and  he  could  see  the  World- 
Honoured  One  from  afar.  As  he  paid  homage 
with  his  head  and  face,  he  naturally  increased  and 
advanced  (in  wisdom),  whereby  he  attained  to  the 
fruition  of  an  Anagamin  (the  third  of  the  four 
grades  to  Nirva/za). 

§  7.  Then  the  World-Honoured  One  said  :  '  Now 
dost  thou  not  know,  O  Vaidehi,  that  Buddha  Ami- 
tayus  is  not  very  far  from  here  ?  Thou  shouldst 
apply  thy  mind  entirely  to  close  meditation  upon 
those  who  have  already  perfected  the  pure  actions 
necessary  for  that  Buddha  country. 

*  I  now  proceed  to  fully  expound  them  for  thee  in 
many  parables,  and  thereby  afford  all  ordinary  per- 
sons of  the  future  who  wish  to  cultivate  these  pure 
actions  an  opportunity  of  being  born  in  the  Land 
of  Highest  Happiness  (Sukhavati)  in  the  western 
quarter.  Those  who  wish  to  be  born  in  that 
country  of  Buddha  have  to  cultivate  a  threefold 
goodness.  Firstly,  they  should  act  filially  towards 
their  parents  and  support  them  ;  serve  and  respect 
their  teachers  and  elders ;  be  of  compassionate 
mind,  abstain  from  doing  any  injury,  and  cultivate 
the  ten  virtuous  actions  ^  Secondly,  they  should 
take  and  observe  the  vow  of  seeking  refuge  with 
the  Three  Jewels,  fulfil  all  moral  precepts,  and  not 
lower  their  dignity  or  neglect  any  ceremonial  observ- 
ance.    Thirdly,  they  should  give  their  whole  mind 

*  I.  e.  observe  the  ten  prohibitive  precepts  of  Buddha. 


i68  amitavur-diiyana-sCtra,  §8. 

to  the  attainment  of  the  Bodhi  (perfect  wisdom), 
deeply  believe  in  (the  principle  of)  cause  and  effect, 
study  and  recite  (the  Sutras  of)  the  Mahayana 
doctrine,  and  persuade  and  encourage  others  who 
pursue  the  same  course  as  themselves. 

*  These  three  groups  as  enumerated  are  called 
the  pure  actions  (leading  to  the  Buddha  country).' 
*  O  Yaidehi !  '  Buddha  continued,  '  dost  thou  not 
understand  now  ?  These  three  classes  of  actions 
are  the  efficient  cause  of  the  pure  actions  taught  by 
all  the  Buddhas  of  the  past,  present,  and  future.' 

^  8.  Buddha  then  addressed  Ananda  as  well  as 
Yaidehi  :  '  Listen  carefully,  listen  carefully  !  Ponder 
carefully  on  what  you  hear!  I,  Tathagata,  now 
declare  the  pure  actions  needful  (for  that  Buddha 
country)  for  the  sake  of  all  beings  hereafter,  that 
are  subject  to  the  misery  (inflicted)  by  the  enemy, 
i.  e.  passion.  Well  done,  O  Vaidehi  !  Appropriate 
questions  are  those  which  thou  hast  asked  ^  !  O 
Ananda,  do  thou  remember  these  words  of  me,  of 
Buddha,  and  repeat  them  openly  to  many  assem- 
blies. I,  Tathagata,  now  teach  Vaidehi  and  also  all 
beings  hereafter  in  order  that  they  may  meditate 
on  the  World  of  Highest  Happiness  (Sukhivati)  in 
the  western  quarter. 

'It  is  by  the  power  of  Buddha  only  that  one  can 
see  that  pure  land  (of  Buddha)  as  clear  as  one  sees 
the  image  of  one's  face  reflected  in  the  transparent 
mirror  held  up  before  one. 

'  When  one  sees  the  state  of  happiness  of  that 
country   in   its  highest  excellence,   one  greatly  re- 


'  Vide  supra,  §  4  ;  hut  those  two  ciucsiions,  though  appropriate, 
have  not  after  all  been  answered  by  Buddha  in  this  Siitra. 


§9.  MEDITATION    ON    BUDDHA    AMITAVUS.  1 69 

joices  in  one's  heart  and  immediately  attains  a  spirit 
of  resignation  prepared  to  endure  whatever  conse- 
quences may  yet  arise  \'  Buddha,  turning  again  to 
Vaidehi,  said :  '  Thou  art  but  an  ordinary  person ; 
the  quahty  of  thy  mind  is  feeble  and  inferior. 

'  Thou  hast  not  as  yet  obtained  the  divine  eye  and 
canst  not  perceive  what  is  at  a  distance.  All  the 
Buddhas,  Tathag-atas  have  various  means  at  their 
disposal  and  can  therefore  afford  thee  an  opportu- 
nity of  seeing  (that  Buddha  country).'  Then 
Vaidehi  rejoined:  '  O  World-Honoured  One,  people 
such  as  I,  can  now  see  that  land  by  the  power  of 
Buddha,  but  how  shall  all  those  beings  who  are  to 
come  after  Buddha's  Nirva;^a,  and  who,  as  being 
depraved  and  devoid  of  good  qualities,  w^ill  be 
harassed  by  the  five  worldly  sufferings  '^ — how  shall 
they  see  the  World  of  Highest  Happiness  of  the 
Buddha  Amitayus  ? ' 

Part  U. 

§  9.  Buddha  then  replied  ;  '  Thou  and  all  other 
beings  besides  ought  to  make  it  their  only  aim,  with 
concentrated  thought,  to  get  a  perception  of  the 
western  quarter.  You  will  ask  how  that  perception 
is  to  be  formed.  I  will  explain  it  now.  All  beings, 
if  not  blind  from  birth,  are  uniformly  possessed  of 
sight,  and  they  all  see  the  setting  sun.  Thou 
shouldst  sit  dow^n  properly,  looking  in  the  western 
direction,  and  prepare  thy  thought  for  a  close  medi- 


^  Anutpatikadharmakshanti,  cf.  Larger  Sukhavaii,  §  19,  p.  39, 
and  §  32,  p.  5.  Kern,  '  the  acquiescence  in  the  eternal  law,'  Sad- 
dharrnapuwfl'arika  XI,  p.  254. 

2  I.  Birth,  2.  Old  age,  3.  Sickness,  4.  Death,  5.  Parting. 


170  AMITAVUR-DIIVANA-sCtRA,  §10. 

tation  on  the  sun  ;  cause  thy  mind  to  be  firmly 
fixed  (on  it)  so  as  to  have  an  unwavering  percep- 
tion by  the  exchisive  apphcation  (of  thy  thought), 
and  gaze  upon  it  (more  particularly)  when  it  is 
about  to  set  and  looks  like  a  suspended  drum. 

'  After  thou  hast  thus  seen  the  sun,  let  (that 
image)  remain  clear  and  fixed,  whether  thine  eyes 
be  shut  or  open  ; — such  is  the  perception  of  the  sun, 
which  is  the  First  Meditation. 

^  10.  '  Next  thou  shouldst  form  the  perception  of 
water ;  gaze  on  the  water  clear  and  pure,  and  let 
(this  image)  also  remain  clear  and  fixed  (after^vards)  ; 
never  allow  thy  thought  to  be  scattered  and  lost. 

'  When  thou  hast  thus  seen  the  water  thou  shouldst 
form  the  perception  of  ice.  As  thou  seest  the  ice 
shining  and  transparent,  thou  shouldst  imagine  the 
appearance  of  lapis  lazuli. 

'After  that  has  been  done,  thou  wilt  see  the  ground 
consisting  of  lapis  lazuli,  transparent  and  shining 
both  within  and  without.  Beneath  this  ground  of 
lapis  lazuli  there  will  be  seen  a  golden  banner  with 
the  seven  jewels,  diamonds  and  the  rest,  supporting 
the  ground  '.  It  extends  to  the  eight  points  of  the 
compass,  and  thus  the  eight  corners  (of  the  ground) 
are  perfectly  filled  up.  Every  side  of  the  eight 
quarters  consists  of  a  hundred  jewels,  every  jewel 
has  a  thousand  rays,  and  every  ray  has  eighty-four 
thousand  colours  which,  when  reflected  in  the  ground 
of  lapis  lazuli,  look  like  a  thousand  millions  of  suns, 
and  it  is  difficult  to  see  them  all  one  by  one.  Over 
the  surface  of  that  ground  of  lapis  lazuli  there  are 


'  '  A    banner   supporting   or   lifting   up  the  ground '   is  rather 
strange,  but  there  is  no  other  way  of  translating  it. 


§11.  MEDITATION    ON    BUDDHA    AMITAVU.'^.  I  71 

Stretched  golden  ropes  intertwined  crosswise  ;  divi- 
sions are  made  by  means  of  (strings  of)  seven 
jewels  with  every  part  clear  and  distinct. 

*  Each  jewel  has  rays  of  five  hundred  colours  which 
look  like  flowers  or  like  the  moon  and  stars.  Lodged 
high  up  in  the  open  sky  these  rays  form  a  tower  of 
rays,  whose  storeys  and  galleries  are  ten  millions 
in  number  and  built  of  a  hundred  jewels.  Both 
sides  of  the  tower  have  each  a  hundred  millions  of 
flowery  banners  furnished  and  decked  with  number- 
less musical  instruments.  Eight  kinds  of  cool 
breezes  proceed  from  the  brilliant  rays.  When 
those  musical  instruments  are  played,  they  emit 
the  sounds  "  suffering,"  "  non-existence,"  "  imperma- 
nence,"  and  "non-self;" — such  is  the  perception  of 
the  water,  which  is  the  Second  Meditation. 

§11.  'When  this  perception  has  been  formed, 
thou  shouldst  meditate  on  its  (constituents)  one 
by  one  and  make  (the  images)  as  clear  as  possible, 
so  that  they  may  never  be  scattered  and  lost, 
whether  thine  eyes  be  shut  or  open.  Except  only 
during  the  time  of  thy  sleep,  thou  shouldst  always 
keep  this  in  thy  mind.  One  who  has  reached  this 
(stage  of)  perception  is  said  to  have  dimly  seen 
the  Land  of  Highest  Happiness  (Sukhavati). 

'  One  who  has  obtained  the  Samadhi  (the  state 
of  supernatural  calm)  is  able  to  see  the  land  (of 
that  Buddha  country)  clearly  and  distinctly  :  (this 
state)  is  too  much  to  be  explained  fully; — such 
is  the  perception  of  the  land,  and  it  is  the  Third 
Meditation. 

*  Thou  shouldst  remember,  O  Ananda,  the  Buddha 
words  of  mine,  and  repeat  this  law  for  attaining  to 
the  perception  of  the  land  (of  the  Buddha  country) 


172  AMITAVUR-DllYANA-sC'TRA,  §12. 

for  the  sake  of  the  great  mass  of  the  people  here- 
after who  may  wish  to  be  deHvered  from  their 
sufferings.  If  any  one  meditates  on  the  land  (of 
that  Buddha  country),  his  sins  (which  bind  him  to) 
births  and  deaths  during  eighty  millions  of  kalpas 
shall  be  expiated  ;  after  the  abandonment  of  his 
(present)  body,  he  will  assuredly  be  born  in  the 
pure  land  in  the  following  life.  The  practice  of 
this  kind  of  meditation  is  called  the  "  right  medita- 
tion." If  it  be  of  another  kind  it  is  called  "  heretical 
meditation."  ' 

§  12.  Buddha  then  spoke  to  Ananda  and  Vaidehi : 
'  When  the  perception  of  the  land  (of  that  Buddha 
country)  has  been  gained,  you  should  next  meditate 
on  the  jewel-trees  (of  that  country).  In  meditating 
on  the  jewel-trees,  you  should  take  each  by  itself 
and  form  a  perception  of  the  seven  rows  of  trees ; 
every  tree  is  eight  hundred  yo^anas  high,  and  all 
the  jewel-trees  have  flowers  and  leaves  consisting 
of  seven  jewels  all  perfect.  All  flowers  and  leaves 
have  colours  like  the  colours  of  various  jewels  : — 
from  the  colour  of  lapis  lazuli  there  issues  a  golden 
ray ;  from  the  colour  of  crystal,  a  saffron  ray ;  from 
the  colour  of  agate,  a  diamond  ray  ;  from  the  colour 
of  diamond,  a  ray  of  blue  pearls.  Corals,  amber, 
and  all  other  gems  are  used  as  ornaments  for  illu- 
mination ;  nets  of  excellent  pearls  are  spread  over 
the  trees,  each  tree  is  covered  by  seven  sets  of  nets, 
and  between  one  set  and  another  there  are  five 
hundred  millions  of  palaces  built  of  excellent  flowers, 
rc's(tmbling  the  palace  of  the  Lord  Brahman  ;  all 
heavenly  children  live  there  quite  naturally  ;  every 
child  has  a  garland  consisting  of  five  hundred  mil- 
lions of  precious  gems  like  those  that  are  fastened 


§12.  MEDITATION    ON    BUDDHA    AMITAYUS.  I  73 

on  ^Sakra's  (Indra's)  head  \  the  rays  of  which  shine 
over  a  hundred  yq^anas,  just  as  if  a  hundred 
milHons  of  suns  and  moons  were  united  together ; 
it  is  difficult  to  explain  them  in  detail.  That  (gar- 
land) is  the  most  excellent  among  all,  as  it  is  the 
commixture  of  all  sorts  of  jewels.  Rows  of  these 
jewel-trees  touch  one  another ;  the  leaves  of  the 
trees  also  join  one  another. 

'Among  the  dense  foliage  there  blossom  various 
beautiful  flowers,  upon  which  are  miraculously  found 
fruits  of  seven  jewels.  The  leaves  of  the  trees 
are  all  exactly  equal  in  length  and  in  breadth, 
measuring  twenty-five  yo^anas  each  way ;  every 
leaf  has  a  thousand  colours  and  a  hundred  different 
pictures  on  it,  just  like  a  heavenly  garland.  There 
are  many  excellent  flowers  which  have  the  colour  of 
6^ambunada  gold  and  an  appearance  of  fire-wheels 
in  motion,  turning  between  the  leaves  in  a  graceful 
fashion.  All  the  fruits  are  produced  just  (as  easily) 
as  if  they  flowed  out  from  the  pitcher  of  the  God 
^'akra.  There  is  a  magnificent  ray  which  trans- 
forms itself  into  numberless  jewelled  canopies  with 
banners  and  flags.  Within  these  jewelled  canopies 
the  works  of  all  the  Buddhas  of  the  Great  Chiliocosm 
appear  illuminated  ;  the  Buddha  countries  of  the 
ten  quarters  also  are  manifested  therein.  When 
you  have  seen  these  trees  you  should  also  meditate 
on  them  one  by  one  in  order.  In  meditating  on 
the  trees,  trunks,  branches,  leaves,  flowers,  and 
fruits,  let  them  all  be  distinct  and  clear ; — such  is 
the  perception  of  the  trees  (of  that  Buddha  country), 
and  it  is  the  Fourth  Meditation. 

^  The  lext  has  6'akrabhilagnama«iratna,  vide  infra,  §§  16,  19. 


I  74  AMITAYUR-DHYANA-stiTRA,  §  13 

§  13.  'Next,  you  should  perceive  the  water  (of 
that  country).  The  perception  of  the  water  is  as 
follows  : — 

'  In  the  Land  of  Highest  Happiness  there  are 
waters  in  eight  lakes ;  the  water  in  every  lake 
consists  of  seven  jewels  which  are  soft  and  yielding. 
Deriving  its  source  from  the  king  of  jewels  that 
fulfils  every  wish  ',  the  water  is  divided  into  fourteen 
streams ;  every  stream  has  the  colour  of  seven 
jewels  ;  its  channel  is  built  of  gold,  the  bed  of  which 
consists  of  the  sand  of  variegated  diamonds. 

'  In  the  midst  of  each  lake  there  are  sixty  millions 
of  lotus-flowers,  made  of  seven  jewels ;  all  the 
flowers  are  perfectly  round  and  exactly  equal  (in 
circumference),  being  twelve  yq^anas.  The  water 
of  jewels  flows  amidst  the  flowers  and  rises  and 
falls  by  the  stalks  (of  the  lotus) ;  the  sound  of  the 
streaming  water  is  melodious  and  pleasing,  and 
propounds  all  the  perfect  virtues  (Paramitas),  "  suffer- 
ing," "  non-existence,"  "  impermanence,"  and  "  non- 
self;"  it  proclaims  also  the  praise  of  the  signs  of 
perfection  -,  and  minor  marks  of  excellence  -  of  all 
Buddhas.  From  the  king  of  jewels  that  fulfils 
every  wish,  stream  forth  the  golden-coloured  rays 
excessively  beautiful,  the  radiance  of  which  trans- 
forms itself  into  birds  possessing  the  colours  of 
a  hundred  jewels,  which  sing  out  harmonious  notes, 
sweet  and  delicious,  ever  praising  the  remembrance 
of  Buddha,  the  remembrance  of  the  Law,  and  the 
remembrance  of  the  Church  ; — such  is  the  perception 


'  Sanskrit  A'intamawi,  i.e.  '  wishing-pearl.' 

'  For  thirty-two  signs  and  eighty  minor  marks  vide  Dharma- 
sahgraha  by  Kasawara,  p.  53  scq.  (vol.  i,  part  v,  Anccdota 
Oxonicnsb,  Aryan  Series,  1885). 


§15-  MEDITATION    ON    BUDDHA    AMITAYUS.  1 75 

of  the  water  of  eight  good  qualities,  and  it  is  the 
Fifth  Meditation. 

§  14.  '  Each  division  of  that  (Buddha)  country, 
which  consists  of  several  jewels,  has  also  jewelled 
storeys  and  galleries  to  the  number  of  five  hundred 
millions  ;  within  each  storey  and  gallery  there  are 
innumerable  Devas  engaged  in  playing  heavenly 
music.  There  are  some  musical  Instruments  that 
are  hung  up  in  the  open  sky,  like  the  jewelled 
banners  of  heaven ;  they  emit  musical  sounds  with- 
out being  struck,  which,  while  resounding  variously, 
all  propound  the  remembrance  of  Buddha,  of  the 
Law  and  of  the  Church,  Bhikshus,  &c.  When 
this  perception  is  duly  accomplished,  one  is  said  to 
have  dimly  seen  the  jewel-trees,  jewel-ground,  and 
jewel-lakes  of  that  World  of  Highest  Happiness 
(Sukhavati) ; — such  is  the  perception  formed  by 
meditating  on  the  general  (features  of  that  Land), 
and  it  is  the  Sixth  Meditation. 

'  If  one  has  experienced  this,  one  has  expiated  the 
greatest  sinful  deeds  which  would  (otherwise  lead 
one)  to  transmigration  for  numberless  millions  of 
kalpas  ;  after  his  death  he  will  assuredly  be  born 
in  that  land. 

J  15^  'Listen  carefully!  listen  carefully!  Think 
over  what  you  have  heard!  I,  Buddha,  am  about 
to  explain  in  detail  the  law  of  delivering  one's  self 
from  trouble  and  torment.  Commit  this  to  your 
memory  in  order  to  explain  it  in  detail  before  a  great 
assembly.'  While  Buddha  was  uttering  these  words, 
Buddha  Amitayus  stood   in   the   midst   of  the   sky 

'  §  15.  Hereafter,  for  brevity's  sake,  I  take  the  liberty  of  omitting 
several  passages  which  seem  to  be  unnecessary  repetitions. 


176  AMITAVUR-DIIYANA-SL'TRA,  §16. 

with  Bodhisattvas  MahasthAma  and  Avalokite^vara, 
attending  on  his  right  and  left  respectively.  There 
was  such  a  bright  and  dazzling  radiance  that  no  one 
could  see  clearly ;  the  brilliance  was  a  hundred 
thousand  times  greater  than  that  of  gold  ((S'ambii- 
nada).  Thereupon  Vaidehi  saw  Buddha  Amitayus 
and  approached  the  World- Honoured  One,  and 
worshipped  him,  touching  his  feet ;  and  spoke  to 
him  as  follows  :  *  O  Exalted  One  !  I  am  now  able, 
by  the  power  of  Buddha,  to  see  Buddha  Amitayus 
together  with  the  two  Bodhisattvas.  But  how  shall 
all  the  beings  of  the  future  meditate  on  Buddha 
Amitayus  and  the  two  Bodhisattvas?' 

§  16.  Buddha  answered:  'Those  who  wish  to 
meditate  on  that  Buddha  ought  first  to  direct  their 
thought  as  follows :  form  the  perception  of  a  lotus- 
flower  on  a  ground  of  seven  jewels,  each  leaf  of 
that  lotus  exhibits  the  colours  of  a  hundred  jewels, 
and  has  eighty-four  thousand  veins,  just  like  heavenly 
pictures ;  each  vein  possesses  eighty-four  thousand 
rays,  of  which  each  can  be  clearly  seen.  Every 
small  leaf  and  flower  is  two  hundred  and  fifty 
yo^anas  in  length  and  the  same  measurement  in 
breadth.  Each  lotus-flower  possesses  eighty-four 
thousand  leaves,  each  leaf  has  the  kingly  pearls  to 
the  number  of  a  hundred  millions,  as  ornaments  for 
illumination  ;  each  pearl  shoots  out  a  thousand  rays 
like  bright  canopies.  The  surface  of  the  ground  is 
entirely  covered  by  a  mixture  of  seven  jewels. 
There  is  a  tower  built  of  the  gems  which  are  like 
those  that  are  fastened  on  6'akra's  head.  It  is 
inlaid  and  decked  with  eighty  thousand  diamonds, 
Ki;;/5uka  jewels,  Brahma-ma/n  and  excellent  pearl 
nets. 


§17.  MEDITATION    ON    BUDDHA    AMITAYUS.  I  77 

*  On  that  tower  there  are  miraculously  found  four 
posts  with  jewelled  banners ;  each  banner  looks  like 
a  hundred  thousand  millions  of  Sumeru  mountains. 

'  The  jewelled  veil  over  these  banners  is  like  that 
of  the  celestial  palace  of  Yama,  illuminated  with 
five  hundred  millions  of  excellent  jewels,  each  jewel 
has  eighty-four  thousand  rays,  each  ray  has  various 
golden  colours  to  the  number  of  eighty-four  thousand, 
each  golden  colour  covers  the  whole  jewelled  soil,  it 
changes  and  is  transformed  at  various  places,  every 
now  and  then  exhibiting  various  appearances  ;  now 
it  becomes  a  diamond  tower,  now  a  pearl  net,  again 
clouds  of  mixed  flowers,  freely  changing  its  mani- 
festation in  the  ten  directions  it  exhibits  the  state 
of  Buddha ; — such  is  the  perception  of  the  flowery 
throne,  and  it  is  the  Seventh  Meditation.' 

Buddha,  turning  to  Ananda,  said  :  '  These  excel- 
lent flowers  were  created  originally  by  the  power 
of  the  prayer  of  Bhikshu,  Dharmakara  ^  All  who 
wish  to  exercise  the  remembrance  of  that  Buddha 
ought  first  to  form  the  perception  of  that  flowery 
throne.  When  engaged  in  it  one  ought  not  to 
perceive  vaguely,  but  fix  the  mind  upon  each  detail 
separately.  Leaf,  jewel,  ray,  tower,  and  banner 
should  be  clear  and  distinct,  just  as  one  sees  the 
image  of  one's  own  face  in  a  mirror.  When  one 
has  achieved  this  perception,  the  sins  which  would 
produce  births  and  deaths  during  fifty  thousand 
kalpas  are  expiated,  and  he  is  one  who  will  most 
assuredly  be  born  in  the  World  of  Highest  Happi- 
ness. 

^17.'  When  you  have  perceived  this,  you  should 

^  Vide  Larger  Sukhavati,  p.  7,  §  3- 
[49]  ''n 


1 78  amitayur-dhyana-sOtra,  §  17. 

next  perceive  Buddha  himself.  Do  you  ask  how  ? 
Every  Buddha  Tatha^^ata  is  one  whose  (spiritual) 
body  is  the  principle  of  nature  (Darmadhatu-kaya), 
so  that  he  may  enter  into  the  mind  of  any  beings. 
Consequently,  when  you  have  perceived  Buddha, 
it  is  indeed  that  mind  of  yours  that  possesses  those 
thirty-two  signs  of  perfection  and  eighty  minor 
marks  of  excellence  (which  you  see  in  Buddha). 
In  fine,  it  is  your  mind  that  becomes  Buddha,  nay, 
it  is  your  mind  that  is  indeed  Buddha.  The  ocean 
of  true  and  universal  knowledge  of  all  the  Buddhas 
derives  its  source  from  one's  own  mind  and  thouoht. 
Therefore  you  should  apply  your  thought  with  an 
undivided  attention  to  a  careful  meditation  on  that 
Buddha  Tathagata,  Arhat,  the  Holy  and  Fully 
Enlightened  One.  In  forming  the  perception  of 
that  Buddha,  you  should  first  perceive  the  image 
of  that  Buddha  ;  whether  your  eyes  be  open  or  shut, 
look  at  an  image  like  (S"ambunada  gold  in  colour, 
sitting  on  that  flower  (throne  mentioned  before). 

'  When  you  have  seen  the  seated  figure  your  mental 
vision  will  become  clear,  and  you  will  be  able  to 
see  clearly  and  distinctly  the  adornment  of  that 
Buddha  country,  the  jewelled  ground,  &c.  In  seeing 
these  things,  let  them  be  clear  and  fixed  just  as 
you  see  the  palms  of  your  hands.  When  you  have 
passed  through  this  experience,  you  should  further 
form  (a  perception  of)  another  great  lotus-flower 
which  is  on  the  left  side  of  Buddha,  and  is  exactly 
equal  in  every  way  to  the  above-mentioned  lotus- 
flower  of  Buddha.  Still  further,  you  should  form 
(a  perception  of)  another  lotus-flower  which  is  on 
the  right  side  of  Buddha.  Perceive  that  an  image 
of  Bodhisattva  Avalokitejvara  is  sitting  on  the  left- 


§  l8.  MEDITATION    ON    BUDDHA    AMITAYUS.  I  79 


hand  flowery  throne,  shooting  forth  golden  rays 
exactly  like  those  of  Buddha.  Perceive  then  that 
an  image  of  Bodhisattva  Mahasthama  is  sitting  on 
the  right-hand  flowery  throne. 

'  When  these  perceptions  are  gained  the  images  of 
Buddha  and  the  Bodhisattvas  will  all  send  forth 
brilliant  rays,  clearly  lighting  up  all  the  jewel-trees 
with  golden  colour.  Under  every  tree  there  are 
also  three  lotus-flowers.  On  every  lotus-flower  there 
is  an  image,  either  of  Buddha  or  of  a  Bodhi- 
sattva ;  thus  (the  images  of  the  Bodhisattvas  and 
of  Buddha)  are  found  everywhere  in  that  country. 
When  this  perception  has  been  gained,  the  devotee 
should  hear  the  excellent  Law  preached  by  means 
of  a  stream  of  water,  a  brilliant  ray  of  light,  several 
jewel-trees,  ducks,  geese,  and  swans.  Whether  he 
be  wrapped  in  meditation  or  whether  he  has  ceased 
from  it,  he  should  ever  hear  the  excellent  Law. 
What  the  devotee  hears  must  be  kept  in  memory 
and  not  be  lost,  when  he  ceases  from  that  medita- 
tion ;  and  it  should  agree  with  the  Sutras,  for  if  it 
does  not  agree  with  the  Sutras,  it  is  called  an  illusory 
perception,  whereas  if  it  does  agree,  it  is  called  the 
rough  perception  of  the  World  of  Highest  Happi- 
ness ; — such  is  the  perception  of  the  images,  and  it 
is  the  Eio^hth  Meditation. 

'  He  who  has  practised  this  meditation  is  freed 
from  the  sins  (which  otherwise  involve  him  in)  births 
and  deaths  for  innumerable  millions  of  kalpas,  and 
during  this  present  life  he  obtains  the  Samadhi  due 
to  the  remembrance  of  Buddha. 

^18.  'Further,  when  this  perception  is  gained, 
you  should  next  proceed  to  meditate  on  the  bodily 
marks  and  the  light  of  Buddha  Amitayus. 

'^N  2 


i8o  amitayur-dhyana-sCtra,  §  i8. 

'  Thou  shouldst  know,  O  Ananda,  that  the  body 
of  Buddha  Amitayus  is  a  hundred  thousand  milHon 
times  as  bright  as  the  colour  of  the  G"ambunada 
gold  of  the  heavenly  abode  of  Yama  ;  the  height 
of  that  Buddha  is  six  hundred  thousand  niyutas  of 
ko/is  of  yo^nas  innumerable  as  are  the  sands  of 
the  river  Gahga. 

'  The  white  twist  of  hair  between  the  eyebrows 
all  turning  to  the  right,  is  just  like  the  five  Sumeru 
mountains. 

'  The  eyes  of  Buddha  are  like  the  water  of  the 
four  great  oceans ;  the  blue  and  the  white  are  quite 
distinct. 

'  All  the  roots  of  hair  of  his  body  issue  forth 
brilliant  rays  which  are  also  like  the  Sumeru 
mountains. 

'  The  halo  of  that  Buddha  is  like  a  hundred 
millions  of  the  Great  Chiliocosms ;  in  that  halo 
there  are  Buddhas  miraculously  created,  to  the 
number  of  a  million  of  niyutas  of  ko/is  innumer- 
able as  the  sands  of  the  Gahga  ;  each  of  these 
Buddhas  has  for  attendants  a  great  assembly  of 
numberless  Bodhisattvas  who  are  also  miraculously 
created. 

*  Buddha  Amitdyus  has  eighty-four  thousand  signs 
of  perfection,  each  sign  is  possessed  of  eighty-four 
minor  marks  of  excellence,  each  mark  has  eighty- 
four  thousand  rays,  each  ray  extends  so  far  as  to 
shine  over  the  worlds  of  the  ten  quarters,  whereby 
Buddha  embraces  and  protects  all  the  beings  who 
think  upon  him  and  does  not  exclude  (any  one  of 
them).  His  rays,  signs,  ^'c,  are  difficult  to  be 
explained  in  detail.  Pnit  in  simple  meditation  let 
the  niind's  eye  dwell  upon  them. 


§19-  MEDITATION    ON    BUDDHA    AMITAYUS.  l8l 

*  If  you  pass  through  this  experience,  you  will  at 
the  same  time  see  all  the  Buddhas  of  the  ten 
quarters.  Since  you  see  all  the  Buddhas  it  is  called 
the  Samadhi  of  the  remembrance  of  the  Buddhas. 

*  Those  who  have  practised  this  meditation  are 
said  to  have  contemplated  the  bodies  of  all  the 
Buddhas.  Since  they  have  meditated  on  Buddha's 
body,  they  will  also  see  Buddha's  mind.  It  is  great 
compassion  that  is  called  Buddha's  mind.  It  is  by 
his  absolute  compassion  that  he  receives  all  beings. 

*  Those  who  have  practised  this  meditation  will, 
when  they  die,  be  born  in  the  presence  of  the  Buddhas 
in  another  life,  and  obtain  a  spirit  of  resignation 
wherewith  to  face  all  the  consequences  which  shall 
hereafter  arise. 

'  Therefore  those  who  have  wisdom  should  direct 
their  thought  to  the  careful  meditation  upon  that 
Buddha  Amitayus.  Let  those  who  meditate  on 
Buddha  Amitayus  begin  with  one  single  sign  or 
mark — let  them  first  meditate  on  the  white  twist 
of  hair  between  the  eyebrows  as  clearly  as  possible ; 
when  they  have  done  this,  the  eighty-four  thousand 
signs  and  marks  will  naturally  appear  before  their 
eyes.  Those  who  see  Amitayus  will  also  see  all 
the  innumerable  Buddhas  of  the  ten  quarters.  Since 
they  have  seen  all  the  innumerable  Buddhas,  they 
will  receive  the  prophecy  of  their  future  destiny 
(to  become  Buddha),  in  the  presence  of  all  the 
Buddhas  ; — such  is  the  perception  gained  by  a  com- 
plete meditation  on  all  forms  and  bodies  (of  Buddha), 
and  it  is  the  Ninth  Meditation. 

§  19.  'When  you  have  seen  Buddha  Amitdyus 
distinctly,  you  should  then  further  meditate  upon 
Bodhisattva  Avalokite^vara,  whose  height  is  eight 


1 82  amitayur-dhyana-sOtra,  §19. 

hundred  thousands  of  niyutas  of  )o^anas  ;  the 
colour  of  his  body  is  purple  gold,  his  head  has 
a  turban  (ush;/ishai"iraskata),  at  the  back  of  which 
there  is  a  halo ;  (the  circumference  of)  his  face  is 
a  hundred  thousand  yo^anas.  In  that  halo,  there 
are  five  hundred  Buddhas  miraculously  transformed 
just  like  those  of  6'akyamuni  Buddha,  each  trans- 
formed Buddha  is  attended  by  five  hundred  trans- 
formed Bodhisattvas  who  are  also  attended  by 
numberless  gods. 

'Within  the  circle  of  light  emanating  from  his 
whole  body,  appear  illuminated  the  various  forms 
and  marks  of  all  beings  that  live  in  the  five  paths  ^ 
of  existence. 

'  On  the  top  of  his  head  is  a  heavenly  crown 
of  gems  like  those  that  are  fastened  (on  Indra's 
head),  in  which  crown  there  is  a  transformed  Buddha 
standing,  twenty-five  yo^anas  high. 

'  The  face  of  Bodhisattva  Avalokitejvara  is  like 
G^ambunada  gold  in  colour. 

*  The  soft  hair  between  the  e)'ebrows  has  all  the 
colours  of  the  seven  jewels,  from  which  eighty-four 
kinds  of  rays  flow  out,  each  ray  has  innumerable 
transformed  Buddhas,  each  of  whom  is  attended  by 
numberless  transformed  Bodhisattvas;  freely  chang- 
ing their  manifestations  they  fill  up  the  worlds  of 
the  ten  quarters ;  (the  appearance)  can  be  compared 
with  the  colour  of  the  red  lotus-flower. 

'  (He  wears)  a  garland  consisting  of  eight  thousand 
rays,  in  which  is  seen  fully  reflected  a  state  of  perfect 
beauty.  The  palm  of  his  hand  has  a  mi.xed  colour 
of  five  hundred  lotus-flgwers.      I  lis  hands  have  ten 

'  Men,  gods,  licll,  ilie  dcpiirlcd  spirits,  ilic  brute  creation. 


§  19-  MEDITATION    ON    BUDDHA    AMITAVUS. 


(tips  of)  fingers,  each  tip  has  eighty-four  thousand 
pictures,  which  are  Hke  signet-marks,  each  picture 
has  eighty-four  thousand  colours,  each  colour  has 
eighty-four  thousand  rays  which  are  soft  and  mild 
and  shine  over  all  things  that  exist.  With  these 
jewel  hands  he  draws  and  embraces  all  beings. 
When  he  lifts  up  his  feet,  the  soles  of  his  feet  are 
seen  to  be  marked  with  a  wheel  of  a  thousand 
spokes  (one  of  the  thirty-two  signs)  which  miracu- 
lously transform  themselves  into  five  hundred  million 
pillars  of  rays.  When  he  puts  his  feet  down  to 
the  ground,  the  flowers  of  diamonds  and  jewels  are 
scattered  about,  and  all  things  are  simply  covered 
by  them.  All  the  other  signs  of  his  body  and  the 
minor  marks  of  excellence  are  perfect,  and  not  at 
all  different  from  those  of  Buddha,  except  the  signs 
of  having  the  turban  on  his  head  and  the  top  of 
his  head  invisible,  which  two  signs  of  him  are 
inferior  to  those  of  the  World- Honoured  One  ; — 
such  is  the  perception  of  the  real  form  and  body 
of  Bodhisattva  Avalokite^vara,  and  it  is  the  Tenth 
Meditation.' 

Buddha,  especially  addressing  Ananda,  said :  '  Who- 
soever wishes  to  meditate  on  Bodhisattva  Avalo- 
kite^vara  must  do  so  in  the  way  I  have  explained. 
Those  who  practise  this  meditation  will  not  suffer 
any  calamity ;  they  will  utterly  remove  the  obstacle 
that  is  raised  by  Karma,  and  will  expiate  the  sins 
which  would  involve  them  in  births  and  deaths 
for  numberless  kalpas.  Even  the  hearing  of  the 
name  of  this  Bodhisattva  will  enable  one  to  obtain 
immeasurable  happiness.  How  much  more,  then, 
will  the  diligent  contemplation  of  him  ! 

'  Whosoever  will  meditate  on  Bodhisattva  Avalo- 


184  amitayur-dhyana-sCtra,  §19. 

kite5"vara  should  first  meditate  on  the  turban  of  his 
head,  and  then  on  his  heavenly  crown. 

'  All  the  other  signs  should  also  be  meditated  on 
according  to  their  order,  and  they  should  be  clear 
and  distinct  just  as  one  sees  the  palms  of  one's 
hands. 

'Next  you  should  meditate  on  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sthama,  whose  bodily  signs,  height,  and  size  are 
equal  to  those  of  Avalokitejvara ;  the  circumference 
(lit.  surface)  of  his  halo  is  one  hundred  and  twenty- 
five  yq^anas,  and  it  shines  as  far  as  two  hundred 
and  fift}'  yo^;f^anas.  The  rays  of  his  whole  body 
shine  over  the  countries  of  the  ten  quarters,  they 
are  purple  gold  in  colour,  and  can  be  seen  by  all 
bein<Ts  that  are  in  favourable  circumstances. 

'  If  one  but  sees  the  ray  that  issues  from  a  single 
root  of  the  hair  of  this  Bodhisattva,  he  will  at  the 
same  time  see  the  pure  and  excellent  rays  of  all 
the  innumerable  Buddhas  of  the  ten  quarters. 

'  For  this  reason  this  Bodhisattva  is  named  the 
Unlimited  Light;  it  is  with  this  light  of  wisdom 
that  he  shines  over  all  beings  and  causes  them 
to  be  removed  from  the  three  paths  of  existence 
(Hells,  Pretas,  and  the  brute  creation),  and  to  obtain 
the  highest  power.  For  the  same  reason  this  Bodhi- 
sattva is  called  the  Bodhisattva  of  Great  Streiiijth 
(Mahisthama).  His  heavenly  crown  has  five  hun- 
dred jewel-flowers ;  each  jewel-flower  has  five 
hundred  jewel-towers  ;  in  each  tower  are  seen  mani- 
fested all  the  pure  and  excellent  features  of  the 
far-stretching  Buddha  countries  in  the  ten  quarters. 
The  turban  on  his  head  is  like  a  padma-  (lotus) 
flower ;  on  the  top  of  the  turban  there  is  a  jewel- 
pitcher,  which    is   filled   with    various   brilliant  rays 


§19-  MEDITATION    ON    BUDDHA    AMITAVUS.  185 

fully  manifesting  the  state  of  Buddha.  All  his 
other  bodily  signs  are  quite  equal  to  those  of 
Avalokitei'vara.  When  this  Bodhisattva  walks 
about,  all  the  regions  of  the  ten  quarters  tremble 
and  quake.  Wherever  the  earth  quakes  there 
appear  five  hundred  millions  of  jewel-flowers  ;  each 
jewel-flower  with  its  splendid  dazzling  beauty  looks 
like  the  World  of  Highest  Happiness  (Sukhavati). 

'  When  this  Bodhisattva  sits  down,  all  the  coun- 
tries of  seven  jewels  at  once  tremble  and  quake  : 
all  the  incarnate  (lit.  divided)  Amitayus's,  innumer- 
able as  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and  all  the  incarnate 
Bodhisattvas  (Aval,  and  Mahas.)  who  dwell  in  the 
middlemost  Buddha  countries  (situated)  between 
the  Buddha  country  of  the  lower  region  (presided 
over)  by  a  Buddha  called  the  "  Golden  Light,"  and 
the  country  of  the  upper  region  (presided  over)  by 
a  Buddha  called  the  "  King  of  Light,"— all  these 
assemble  in  the  World  of  Highest  Happiness 
(Sukhavati),  like  gathering  clouds,  sit  on  their 
thrones  of  lotus-flowers,  which  fill  the  whole  sky, 
and  preach  the  excellent  Law  in  order  to  deliver 
all  the  beings  that  are  plunged  in  suffering; — such 
is  the  perception  of  the  form  and  body  of  Bodhi- 
sattva Mahasthama,  and  it  is  the  Eleventh  Medi- 
tation. 

'Those  who  practise  this  meditation  are  freed 
from  the  sins  (which  would  otherwise  involve  them) 
in  births  and  deaths  for  innumerable  asaiikhya 
kalpas. 

'  Those  who  have  practised  this  meditation  do  not 
live  in  an  embryo  state  but  obtain  free  access  to 
the  excellent  and  admirable  countries  of  Buddhas. 
Those  who  have  experienced  this  are  said  to  have 


1 86  amitayur-diiyana-sCtra,  §20. 

perfectly  meditated  upon  the  two  Bodhlsattvas 
Avalokite^'vara  and  Mahasthama. 

§  20.  *  After  thou  hast  had  this  perception,  thou 
shouldst  imagine  thyself  to  be  born  in  the  World 
of  Highest  Happiness  in  the  western  quarter,  and 
to  be  seated,  cross-leocred,  on  a  lotus-flower  there. 
Then  imagine  that  the  flower  has  shut  thee  in  and 
has  afterwards  unfolded  ;  when  the  flower  has  thus 
unfolded,  five  hundred  coloured  rays  will  shine  over 
thy  body,  thine  eyes  will  be  opened  so  as  to  see 
the  Buddhas  and  Bodhisattvas  who  fill  the  whole 
sky ;  thou  wilt  hear  the  sounds  of  waters  and  trees, 
the  notes  of  birds,  and  the  voices  of  many  Buddhas 
preaching  the  excellent  Law,  in  accordance  with  the 
twelve  divisions  ^  of  the  scriptures.  When  thou 
hast  ceased  from  that  meditation,  thou  must  re- 
member the  experience  ever  after. 

*  If  thou  hast  passed  through  this  experience  thou 
art  said  to  have  seen  the  World  of  Highest  Happi- 
ness in  the  realm  of  the  Buddha  Amitayus ; — this 
is  the  perception  obtained  by  a  complete  meditation 
on  that  Buddha  country,  and  is  called  the  Twelfth 
Meditation. 

'  The  innumerable  incarnate  bodies  of  Amitayus, 
together  with  those  of  Aval,  and  Mahas.,  constantly 
come  and  appear  before  such  devotees  (as  above 
mentioned).' 

^21.  Buddha  then  spoke  to  Ananda  and  Vaidehi: 
'  Those  who  wish,  by  means  of  their  serene  thoughts, 
to  be  born  in  the  western  land,  should  first  meditate 
on  an  image  of  the  Buddha,  who  is  sixteen  cubits 


'  Vide  Max  Muller,  Dhammapada,  Introduction,  p.  xxxiii,  and 
Kasawara,  Dharmasahgraha,  LXII,  p.  48. 


§21.  MEDITATION    ON    BUDDHA    AMITAYUS.  187 

high  ^,  seated  on  (a  lotus-flower  in)  the  water  of 
the  lake.  As  it  was  stated  before,  the  (real)  body 
and  its  measurement  are  unlimited,  incomprehen- 
sible to  the  ordinary  mind. 

'  But  by  the  efficacy  of  the  ancient  prayer  of  that 
Tathagata,  those  who  think  of  and  remember  him 
shall  certainly  be  able  to  accomplish  their  aim. 

'  Even  the  mere  perceiving  of  the  image  of  that 
Buddha  brings  to  one  immeasurable  blessings.  How 
much  more,  then,  will  the  meditating  upon  all  the 
complete  bodily  signs  of  that  Buddha !  Buddha 
Amitayus  has  supernatural  power;  since  every- 
thing is  at  his  disposal,  he  freely  transforms  himself 
in  the  regions  of  the  ten  quarters.  At  one  time 
he  shows  himself  as  possessing  a  magnificent  body, 
which  fills  the  whole  sky,  at  another  he  makes  his 
body  appear  small,  the  height  being  only  sixteen 
or  eighteen  cubits.  The  body  he  manifests  is 
always  pure  gold  in  colour ;  his  halo — (bright  with) 
transformed  Buddhas — and  his  jewel  lotus-flowers 
are  as  mentioned  above.  The  bodies  of  the  two 
Bodhisattvas  are  the  same  always. 

*  All  beings  can  recognise  either  of  the  two  Bodhi- 
sattvas by  simply  glancing  at  the  marks  of  their 
heads.  These  two  Bodhisattvas  assist  Amitayus 
in  his  work  of  universal  salvation ; — such  is  the 
meditation  that  forms  a  joint  perception  of  the 
Buddha  and  Bodhisattvas,  and  it  is  the  Thirteenth 
Meditation.' 

^  This  is  said  to  have  been  the  height  of  .Sakyamuni ;  the  cubit 
is  Chinese,  but  as  it  varied  from  time  to  time,  it  is  difficult  to 
determine  his  real  height.  Spence  Hardy,  in  his  Manual  of 
Buddhism,  p.  364,  says,  '  Buddha  is  sometimes  said  to  be  twelve 
cubits  in  height,  and  sometimes  eighteen  cubits.' 


1 88  amitavur-diiyana-sOtra,  §22. 


Part  III. 

§  22.  Buddha  then  spoke  to  Ananda  and  Vaidehi : 
*  The  beings  who  will  be  born  in  the  highest  form 
of  the  highest  grade  (i.  e.  to  Buddhahood)  are  those, 
whoever  they  may  be,  who  wish  to  be  born  in  that 
country  and  cherish  the  threefold  thought  whereby 
they  are  at  once  destined  to  be  born  there.  What 
is  the  threefold  thought,  you  may  ask.  First,  the 
True  Thought;  second,  the  Deep  Believing  Thought; 
third,  the  Desire  to  be  born  in  that  Pure  Land  by 
bringing  one's  own  stock  of  merit  to  maturity.  Those 
who  have  this  threefold  thought  in  perfection  shall 
most  assuredly  be  born  into  that  country. 

'  There  are  also  three  classes  of  beincrs  who  are 
able  to  be  born  in  that  country.  What,  you  may 
ask,  are  the  three  classes  of  beings  ?  First,  those 
who  are  possessed  of  a  compassionate  mind,  who 
do  no  injury  to  any  beings,  and  accomplish  all  vir- 
tuous actions  according  to  Buddha's  precepts ; 
second,  those  who  study  and  recite  the  Sutras  of 
the  Mahaydna  doctrine,  for  instance,  the  Vaipulya 
Sutras  ^  ;  third,  those  who  practise  the  sixfold 
remembrance  -.  These  three  classes  of  beings 
who  wish  to  be  born  in  that  country  by  bringing 
(their  respective  stocks  of  merit)  to  maturity,  will 
become  destined  to  be  born  there  if  they  have 
accomplished  any  of  those  meritorious  deeds  for  one 
day  or  even  for  seven  days. 

'  Nanjio's  Catalogue  of  Tripi/aka,  Nos.  23,  24-28,  and  many 
others. 

*  Sixfold  remembrance,  i.  e.  of  the  Three  Jewels,  the  precepts, 
the  charity  of  Buddha,  and  Bodhisativas  and  the  world  of  Devas. 


§22.  MEDITATION    ON   BUDDHA    AMITAYUS.  189 

*  When  one  who  has  practised  (these  merits)  is 
about  to  be  born  in  that  country,  Buddha  Amitayus, 
together  with  the  two  Bodhisattvas  Aval,  and 
Mahas.,  also  numberless  created  Buddhas,  and 
a  hundred  thousand  Bhikshus  and  6ravakas,  with 
their  whole  retinue,  and  innumerable  gods,  together 
with  the  palaces  of  seven  jewels,  will  appear  before 
him  out  of  regard  for  his  diligence  and  courage  ; 
Aval.,  together  with  Mahas.,  will  offer  a  diamond 
seat  to  him  ;  thereupon  Amitayus  himself  will  send 
forth  magnificent  rays  of  light  to  shine  over  the 
dying  person's  body.  He  and  many  Bodhisattvas 
will  offer  their  hands  and  welcome  him,  when  Aval., 
Mahas.,  and  all  the  other  Bodhisattvas  will  praise 
the  glory  of  the  man  who  practised  the  meritorious 
deeds,  and  convey  an  exhortation  to  his  mind. 
When  the  new-comer,  having  seen  these,  rejoicing 
and  leaping  for  joy,  looks  at  himself,  he  will  find 
his  own  body  seated  on  that  diamond  throne  ;  and 
as  he  follows  behind  Buddha  he  will  be  born  into 
that  country,  in  a  moment.  When  he  has  been 
born  there,  he  will  see  Buddha's  form  and  body 
with  every  sign  of  perfection  complete,  and  also 
the  perfect  forms  and  signs  of  all  the  Bodhi- 
sattvas ;  he  will  also  see  brilliant  rays  and  jewel- 
forests  and  hear  them  propounding  the  excellent 
Law,  and  instantly  be  conscious  of  a  spirit  of 
resignation  to  whatever  consequences  may  here- 
after arise.  Before  long  he  will  serve  every  one 
of  the  Buddhas  who  live  in  the  regions  of  the 
ten  quarters.  In  the  presence  of  each  of  those 
Buddhas  he  will  obtain  successively  a  prophecy 
of  his  future  destiny.  On  his  return  to  his  own 
land  (Sukhavati,  in  which   he  has  just  been  born) 


I90  amitayur-dhyana-sOtra,  §23. 

he  will  obtain  countless  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
Dharawt  formulas  (mystic  form  of  prayer) ; — such 
are  those  who  are  to  be  born  in  the  highest  form 
of  the  highest  grade  (to  Buddhahood). 

§  23.  '  Next,  the  beings  who  will  be  born  in  the 
middle  form  of  the  highest  grade  are  those  who 
do  not  necessarily  learn,  remember,  study,  or  recite 
those  Vaipulya  Sutras,  but  fully  understand  the  mean- 
ing of  the  truth  (contained  in  them),  and  having 
a  firm  grasp  of  the  highest  truth  do  not  speak  evil 
of  the  Mahayana  doctrine,  but  deeply  believe  in 
(the  principle  of)  cause  and  effect ;  who  by  bringing 
these  good  qualities  to  maturity  seek  to  be  born  in 
that  Country  of  Highest  Happiness.  When  one  who 
has  acquired  these  qualities  is  about  to  die,  Amitayus, 
surrounded  by  the  two  Bodhisattvas  Aval,  and 
Mahds.,  and  an  innumerable  retinue  of  dependents, 
will  bring  a  seat  of  purple  gold  and  approach  him 
with  words  of  praise,  saying  :  "  O  my  son  in  the 
Law !  thou  hast  practised  the  Mahayana  doctrine ; 
thou  hast  understood  and  believed  the  highest  truth  ; 
therefore  I  now  come  to  meet  and  welcome  thee." 
He  and  the  thousand  created  Buddhas  offer  hands 
all  at  once. 

'  When  that  man  looks  at  his  own  body,  he  will 
find  himself  seated  on  that  purple  gold  seat ;  he 
will,  then,  stretching  forth  his  folded  hands,  praise 
and  eulogise  all  the  Buddhas.  As  quick  as  thought 
he  will  be  born  in  the  lake  of  seven  jewels,  of  that 
country.  That  purple  gold  seat  on  which  he  sits  is 
like  a  magnificent  jewel-flower,  and  will  open  after 
a  night ;  the  new-comer's  body  becomes  purple  gold 
in  colour,  and  he  will  also  find  under  his  feet  a  lotus- 
flower  consisting  of  seven  jewels.     Buddha  and  the 


§24.  MEDITATION    ON    BUDDHA    AMITAYUS.  I9I 

Bodhisattvas  at  the  same  time  will  send  forth  brilliant 
rays  to  shine  over  the  body  of  that  person  whose 
eyes  will  instantaneously  be  opened  and  become 
clear.  According  to  his  former  usage  (in  the  human 
world)  he  will  hear  all  the  voices  that  are  there, 
preaching  primary  truths  of  the  deepest  significance. 

'  Then  he  will  descend  from  that  golden  seat  and 
worship  Buddha  with  folded  hands,  praising  and 
eulocrisinof  the  World- Honoured  One.  After  seven 
days,  he  will  immediately  attain  to  the  state  of 
the  highest  perfect  knowledge  (anuttarasawyaksaw- 
bodhi)  from  which  he  will  never  fall  away  (avaivartya) ; 
next  he  will  fly  to  all  the  ten  regions  and  successively 
serve  all  the  Buddhas  therein  ;  he  will  practise  many 
a  Samadhi  in  the  presence  of  those  Buddhas.  After 
the  lapse  of  a  lesser  kalpa  he  will  attain  a  spirit  of 
resignation  to  whatever  consequences  may  hereafter 
arise,  and  he  will  also  obtain  a  prophecy  of  his  future 
destiny  in  the  presence  of  Buddhas. 

J  24.  '  Next  are  those  who  are  to  be  born  in  the 
lowest  form  of  the  highest  grade  :  this  class  of  beings 
also  believes  in  (the  principle  of)  cause  and  effect, 
and  without  slandering  the  Mahayana  doctrine,  simply 
cherishes  the  thought  of  obtaining  the  highest  Bodhi 
and  by  bringing  this  good  quality  to  maturity  seeks 
to  be  born  in  that  Country  of  Highest  Happiness. 
When  a  devotee  of  this  class  dies,  Amitayus,  with 
Aval.,  Mah^s.,  and  all  the  dependents,  will  offer  him 
a  golden  lotus-flower  ;  he  will  also  miraculously  create 
five  hundred  Buddhas  in  order  to  send  and  meet  him. 
These  five  hundred  created  Buddhas  will,  all  at  once, 
offer  hands  and  praise  him,  saying  :  "O  my  son  in  the 
Law!  thou  art  pure  now  ;  as  thou  hast  cherished  the 
thought  of  obtaining  the  highest  Bodhi,  we  come  to 


192  amitavur-dhyana-sCtra,  §25. 

meet  thee."  When  he  has  seen  them,  he  will  find 
himself  seated  on  that  golden  lotus-flower.  Soon 
the  flower  will  close  upon  him  ;  following  behind  the 
W'orld- Honoured  One  he  will  go  to  be  born  in  the 
lake  of  seven  jewels.  After  one  day  and  one  night 
the  lotus-flower  will  unfold  itself.  Within  seven 
days  he  may  see  Buddha's  body,  though  his  mind 
is  not  as  yet  clear  enough  to  perceive  all  the  signs 
and  marks  of  the  Buddha,  which  he  will  be  able  to 
see  clearly  after  three  weeks  ;  then  he  will  hear  many 
sounds  and  voices  preaching  the  excellent  Law,  and 
he  himself,  travelling  through  all  the  ten  quarters, 
will  worship  all  the  Buddhas,  from  whom  he  will 
learn  the  deepest  significance  of  the  Law.  After 
three  lesser  kalpas  he  will  gain  entrance  to  the  know- 
ledge of  a  hundred  (divisions  of)  nature  (i-atadharma- 
vidyadvara)  and  become  settled  in  the  (first)  joyful 
stage  ^  (of  Bodhisattva).  The  perception  of  these 
three  classes  of  beings  is  called  the  meditation  upon 
the  superior  class  of  beings,  and  is  the  Fourteenth 
Meditation. 

^  25.  '  The  beings  who  will  be  born  in  the  highest 
form  of  the  middle  grade  are  those  who  observe  the 
five  prohibitive  precepts,  the  eight  prohibitive  pre- 
cepts and  the  fasting,  and  practise  all  the  moral 
precepts;  who  do  not  commit  the  five  deadly  sins*'^, 
and  who  bring  no  blame  or  trouble  upon  any  being; 
and  who  by  bringing  these  good  qualities  to  maturity 
seek  to  be  born  in  the  World  of  Highest  Happiness 
in  the  western  quarter.  On  the  eve  of  such  a  person's 
departure   from   this   life,  Amitdyus,  surrounded  by 

'  There  arc  ten  staj^es  which  a  Bodhisattva  goes  through. 
*  Cliildcrs"  Pali  Dictionary,  s.  v.  abh  i//;anain. 


§  26.  MEDITATION    ON    BUDDHA    AMITAYUS.  1 93 

Bhikshus  and  dependents,  will  appear  before  him, 
flashing  forth  rays  of  golden  colour,  and  will  preach 
the  Law  of  suffering,  non-existence,  impermancnce, 
and  non-self.  He  will  also  praise  the  virtue  of  home- 
lessness  that  can  liberate  one  from  all  sufferines. 
At  the  sight  of  Buddha,  that  believer  will  excessively 
rejoice  in  his  heart ;  he  will  soon  find  himself  seated 
on  a  lotus-flower.  Kneelincj  down  on  the  ground 
and  stretching  forth  his  folded  hands  he  will  pay 
homage  to  Buddha.  Before  he  raises  his  head  he 
will  reach  that  Country  of  Highest  Happiness  and 
be  born  there.  Soon  the  lotus-flower  will  unfold, 
when  he  will  hear  sounds  and  voices  praising  and 
glorifying  the  Four  Noble  Truths  (of  suffering).  He 
will  immediately  attain  to  the  fruition  of  Arhat- 
ship,  gain  the  threefold  knowledge  and  the  six 
supernatural  faculties,  and  complete  the  eightfold 
emancipation. 

§  26.  '  The  beings  who  will  be  born  in  the  middle 
form  of  the  middle  o-rade  are  those  who  either 
observe  the  eight  prohibitive  precepts,  and  the  fasting 
for  one  day  and  one  night,  or  observe  the  prohibitive 
precept  for  ^'ramawera  (a  novice)  for  the  same  period, 
or  observe  the  perfect  moral  precepts,  not  lowering 
their  dignity  nor  neglecting  any  ceremonial  observ- 
ance for  one  day  and  one  night,  and  by  bringing 
their  respective  merits  to  maturity  seek  to  be  born 
in  the  Country  of  Highest  Happiness.  On  the  eve 
of  departure  from  this  life,  such  a  believer  who  is 
possessed  of  this  moral  virtue,  which  he  has  made 
fragrant  by  cultivation  during  his  life,  will  see 
Amitayus,  followed  by  all  his  retinue  ;  flashing  forth 
rays  of  golden  colour,  this  Buddha  will  come  before 
him  and  offer  a  lotus-flower  of  seven  jewels. 

[49]  ''o 


194  amitavur-diivana-sCtra,  §27. 

'  He  will  hear  a  voice  in  the  sky,  praising  him 
and  saying :  "  O  son  of  a  noble  family,  thou  art  indeed 
an  excellent  man.  Out  of  regard  for  thy  obedience 
to  ihe  teachings  of  all  the  Buddhas  of  the  three 
worlds  I,  now,  come  and  meet  thee."  Then  the  new- 
comer will  see  himself  seated  on  that  lotus-flower. 
Soon  the  lotus-flower  will  fold  around  him,  and 
being  in  this  he  will  be  born  in  the  jewel-lake  of 
the  World  of  Highest  Happiness  in  the  western 
quarter. 

'  After  seven  days  that  flower  will  unfold  again, 
when  the  believer  will  open  his  eyes,  and  praise  the 
World-Honoured  One,  stretching  forth  his  folded 
hands.  Having  heard  the  Law,  he  will  rejoice  and 
obtain  the  fruition  of  a  Srota-apanna'  (the  first  grade 
to  Nirva;^a). 

'  In  the  lapse  of  half  a  kalpa  he  will  become  an 
Arhat. 

J  27.  '  Next  are  the  beings  who  will  be  born  in 
the  lowest  form  of  the  middle  grade  (to  Buddhahood). 
If  there  be  sons  or  daughters  of  a  noble  family  who 
are  filial  to  their  parents  and  support  them,  besides 
exercising  benevolence  and  compassion  in  the  world, 
at  their  departure  from  this  life,  such  persons  will 
meet  a  good  and  learned  teacher  who  will  fully 
describe  to  them  the  state  of  happiness  in  that 
Buddha  country  of  Amitayus,  and  will  also  explain 
die  forty-eight  prayers  of  the  Bhikshu  Dharmakara-. 
As  soon  as  any  such  person  has  heard  these  details, 
his  life  will  come  to  an  end.     In  a  brief  moment^  he 

'  Vide  Va^ra^X-^c'dika,  §  9. 

*  Vide  Larger  Sukhavatr,  §§  7,  8. 

*  Lit.  '  In  the  time  in  which  a  strong  man  can  bend  liis  arm  or 
stretch  his  bended  arm.' 


§28.  MEDITATION    ON    BUDDHA    AMITAYUS.  I95 

will  be  born  in  the  World  of  Highest  Happiness  in 
the  western  quarter. 

*  After  seven  days  he  will  meet  Aval,  and  Mahas., 
from  whom  he  will  learn  the  Law  and  rejoice.  After 
the  lapse  of  a  lesser  kalpa  he  will  attain  to  the 
fruition  of  an  Arhat.  The  perception  of  these  three 
sorts  of  beings  is  called  the  meditation  of  the  middle 
class  of  beings,  and  is  the  Fifteenth  Meditation. 

§  28.  *  Next  are  the  beings  who  will  be  born  in 
the  highest  form  of  the  lowest  grade.  If  there  be 
any  one  who  commits  many  evil  deeds,  provided 
that  he  does  not  speak  evil  of  the  Mah^vaipulya 
Sutras,  he,  though  himself  a  very  stupid  man,  and 
neither  ashamed  nor  sorry  for  all  the  evil  actions 
that  he  has  done,  yet,  while  dying,  may  meet  a  good 
and  learned  teacher  who  will  recite  and  laud  the 
headings  and  titles  of  the  twelve  divisions  of  the 
Mahayana  scriptures.  Having  thus  heard  the  names 
of  all  the  Sutras,  he  will  be  freed  from  the  greatest 
sins  which  would  involve  him  in  births  and  deaths 
during  a  thousand  kalpas. 

'A  wise  man  also  will  teach  him  to  stretch  forth  his 
folded  hands  and  to  say,  "Adoration  to  Buddha  Ami- 
tayus"  (Namo^mitabhaya  Buddhaya,  or,  Namo.mi- 
tayushe  Buddhaya).  Having  uttered  the  name  of 
the  Buddha,  he  will  be  freed  from  the  sins  which 
would  otherwise  involve  him  in  births  and  deaths 
for  fifty  millions  of  kalpas.  Thereupon  the  Buddha 
will  send  a  created  Buddha,  and  the  created  Bodhi- 
sattvas  Aval,  and  Mahas.,  to  approach  that  person 
with  words  of  praise,  saying :  "O  son  of  a  noble  family, 
as  thou  hast  uttered  the  name  of  that  Buddha,  all 
thy  sins  have  been  destroyed  and  expiated,  and 
therefore  we  now  come  to  meet  thee."     After  this 

*  o  2 


196  AMITAYUR-DHVANA-sOtRA,  §89. 

speech  the  devotee  will  observe  the  rays  of  that 
created  Buddha  flooding  his  chamber  with  light,  and 
while  rejoicing  at  the  sight  he  will  depart  this  life. 
Seated  on  a  lotus-flower  he  will  follow  that  created 
Buddha  and  go  to  be  born  in  the  jewel-lake. 

'  After  the  lapse  of  seven  weeks,  the  lotus-flower 
will  unfold,  when  the  great  compassionate  Bodhi- 
sattvas  Aval,  and  Mahas.  will  stand  before  him, 
flashing  forth  magnificent  rays,  and  will  preach  to 
him  the  deepest  meaning  of  the  twelve  divisions 
of  the  scriptures.  Having  heard  this,  he  will  under- 
stand and  believe  it,  and  cherish  the  thought  of 
attaining  the  highest  Bodhi.  In  a  period  of  ten 
lesser  kalpas  he  will  gain  entrance  to  the  know- 
ledge of  the  hundred  (divisions  of)  nature,  and 
be  able  to  enter  upon  the  first  (joyful)  stage  (of 
Bodhisattva).  Those  who  have  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  hearing  the  name  of  Buddha,  the  name 
of  the  Law,  and  the  name  of  the  Church — the 
names  of  the  Three  Jewels — can  also  be  born  (in 
that  country).' 

§  29.  Buddha  continued  :  *  Next  are  the  beings 
who  will  be  born  in  the  middle  form  of  the  lowest 
grade.  If  there  be  any  one  who  transgresses  the  five 
and  the  eight  prohibitive  precepts,  and  also  all  the 
perfect  moral  precepts ;  he,  being  himself  so  stupid 
as  to  steal  things  that  belong  to  the  whole  com- 
munity \  or  things  that  belong  to  a  particular  Bhikshu, 
and  not  be  ashamed  nor  sorry  for  his  impure  preach- 
ing of  the  Law  (in  case  of  preacher),  but  magnify  and 
glorify  himself  with   many  wicked  deeds  : — such  a 

'  The  text  has  '  saiigliika  tilings,'  which  is  probably  sahgliika 
Idbha,  i.e.  'gains  of  the  whole  community'  opposed  to  gains  of 
a  single  monk,  Childcrs'  Pdii  Dictionaiy,  s.  v.  sahghiko,  p.  449. 


§30.  MEDITATION    ON    BUDDHA    AMITAYUS.  I97 


sinful  person  deserves  to  fall  into  hell  in  consequence 
of  those  sins.  At  the  time  of  his  death,  when  the 
fires  of  hell  approach  hini  from  all  sides,  he  will  meet 
a  good  and  learned  teacher  who  will,  out  of  great 
compassion,  preach  the  power  and  virtue  of  the  ten 
faculties  of  Amitayus  and  fully  explain  the  super- 
natural powers  and  brilliant  rays  of  that  Buddha  ; 
and  will  further  praise  moral  virtue,  meditation, 
wisdom,  emancipation,  and  the  thorough  knowledge 
that  follows  emancipation.  After  having  heard  this, 
he  will  be  freed  from  his  sins,  which  would  involve 
him  in  births  and  deaths  during  eighty  millions  of 
kalpas ;  thereupon  those  violent  fires  of  hell  will 
transform  themselves  into  a  pure  and  cool  wind 
blowing  about  heavenly  flowers.  On  each  of  these 
flowers  will  stand  a  created  Buddha  or  Bodhisattva 
to  meet  and  receive  that  person.  In  a  moment  he 
will  be  born  in  a  lotus-flower  growing  in  the  lake  of 
seven  jewels.  After  six  kalpas  the  lotus-flower  will 
open,  when  Avalokitejvara  and  Mahasthama  will 
soothe  and  encourage  him  with  their  Brahma-voices, 
and  preach  to  him  the  Mahayana  Sutras  of  the 
deepest  significance. 

'  Having  heard  this  Law,  he  will  instantaneously 
direct  his  thought  toward  the  attainment  of  the 
highest  Bodhi. 

§  30.  '  Lastly,  the  beings  who  will  be  born  in  the 
lowest  form  of  the  lowest  grade.  If  there  be  any  one 
who  commits  evil  deeds,  and  even  completes  the  ten 
wicked  actions,  the  five  deadly  sins^  and  the  like  ;  that 

*  The  five  deadly  sins,  according  to  Mahavyutpatti,  §118,  are 
Matr/ghata,  Pitr/ghata,  Arhatghata,  Sahghabheda,  Talhagatasyan- 
tike  dush/aX-ittarudhirotpadana,  which  are  unpardonable  in  the 
Larger  Sukhavati;  vide  Nanjio's  note  and  Pra«idhana  19  (§8),  the 


198  amitayur-diivana-sCtra,  §30. 

man,  being  himself  stupid  and  guilty  of  many  crimes, 
deserves  to  fall  into  a  miserable  path  of  existence 
and  suffer  endless  pains  during  many  kalpas.  On  the 
eve  of  death  he  will  meet  a  good  and  learned  teacher 
who  will,  soothing  and  encouraging  him  in  various 
ways,  preach  to  him  the  excellent  Law  and  teach  him 
the  remembrance  of  Buddha,  but,  being  harassed  by 
pains,  he  will  have  no  time  to  think  of  Buddha. 
Some  good  friend  will  then  say  to  him :  "Even  if  thou 
canst  not  exercise  the  remembrance  of  Buddha,  thou 
mayst,  at  least,  utter  the  name, '  Buddha  Amitayus^'  " 
Let  him  do  so  serenely  with  his  voice  uninterrupted  ; 
let  him  be  (continually)  thinking  of  Buddha  until  he  has 
completed  ten  times  the  thought,  repeating  (the  for- 
mula), "Adoration  to  Buddha  Amitayus"  (Namo^mi- 
tayushe  Buddhaya).  On  the  strength  of  (his  merit 
of)  uttering  Buddha's  name  he  w^ill,  during  every 
repetition,  expiate  the  sins  which  involve  him  in 
births  and  deaths  during  eighty  millions  of  kalpas. 
He  will,  while  dying,  see  a  golden  lotus-flower  like 
the  disk  of  the  sun  appearing  before  his  eyes ;  in 
a  moment  he  will  be  born  in  the  World  of  Highest 
Happiness.  After  twelve  greater  kalpas  the  lotus- 
flower  will  unfold  ;  thereupon  the  Bodhisattvas  Aval, 
and  Mahis.,  raising  their  voices  in  great  compassion, 
will  i:)rcach  to  him  in  detail  the  real  state  of  all  the 
elements  of  nature  and  the  law  of  the  expiation 
of  sins. 

Anantarya  sins.  Cf.  the  six  crimes  enumerated  in  Childers'  Pali 
Dictionary,  p.  7  b,  AbhiManam  ;  vide  supra,  p.  192,  §  25. 

*  The  Corcan  text  and  the  two  other  editions  of  the  Tang 
and  Sung  dynasties  have  '  Namo^mitayuslie  Buddhaya'  instead  of 
'  Buddha  Amitayus,'  which  is  the  reading  of  the  Japanese  text 
and  the  edition  of  the  IMihg  dynasty. 


^  3^.  MEDITATION  ON  BUDDHA  AMITAYUS.      1 99 

*  On  hearing  them  he  will  rejoice  and  will  immedi- 
ately direct  his  thought  toward  the  attainment  of 
the  Bodhi ; — such  are  the  beings  who  are  to  be 
born  in  the  lowest  form  of  the  lowest  grade  (to 
Buddhahood).  The  perception  of  the  above  three 
is  called  the  meditation  of  the  inferior  class  of 
beings,  and  is  the  Sixteenth  Meditation.' 


Part  IV. 

J  31.  When  Buddha  had  finished  this  speech, 
Vaidehi,  together  with  her  five  hundred  female  atten- 
dants, could  see,  as  guided  by  the  Buddha's  words, 
the  scene  of  the  far-stretching  World  of  the  Highest 
Happiness,  and  could  also  see  the  body  of  Buddha 
and  the  bodies  of  the  two  Bodhisattvas.  With  her 
mind  filled  with  joy  she  praised  them,  saying: '  Never 
have  I  seen  such  a  wonder!'  Instantaneously  she 
became  wholly  and  fully  enlightened,  and  attained 
a  spirit  of  resignation,  prepared  to  endure  whatever 
consequences  might  yet  arise  ^  Her  five  hundred 
female  attendants  too  cherished  the  thought  of 
obtaining  the  highest  perfect  knowledge,  and  sought 
to  be  born  in  that  Buddha  country. 

^32.  The  World-Honoured  One  predicted  that 
they  would  all  be  born  in  that  Buddha  country,  and 
be  able  to  obtain  the  Samadhi  (the  supernatural 
calm)  of  the  presence  of  many  Buddhas.  All  the 
innumerable  Devas  (gods)  also  directed  their  thought 
toward  the  attainment  of  the  highest  Bodhi. 

Thereupon  Ananda  rose  from  his  seat,  approached 

^  Vide  supra,  §§  8,  22,  23. 


200  AMITAVUR-DIIVANA-SUTRA,  §32. 

Buddha,  and  spoke  thus  :  '  O  World-Honoured  One, 
what  should  we  call  this  Sutra  ?  And  how  should  we 
receive  and  remember  it  (in  the  future)  ? ' 

Buddha  said  in  his  reply  to  Ananda  :  '  O  Ananda, 
this  Sutra  should  be  called  the  meditation  on  the 
Land  of  Sukhavati,  on  Buddha  Amitayus,  Bodhi- 
sattva  AvalokitejTvara,  Bodhisattva  INTahasthama,  or 
otherwise  be  called  "  (the  Sutra  on)  the  entire  removal 
of  the  obstacle  of  Karma  S  (the  means  of)  being  born 
in  the  realm  of  the  Buddhas."  Thou  shouldst  take 
and  hold  it,  not  forgetting  nor  losing  it.  Those  who 
practise  the  Samadhi  (the  supernatural  calm)  in 
accordance  with  this  Sutra  will  be  able  to  see,  in 
the  present  life,  Buddha  Amitayus  and  the  two  great 
Bodhisattvas. 

'  In  case  of  a  son  or  a  daughter  of  a  noble  family, 
the  mere  hearing  of  the  names  of  the  Buddha  and 
the  two  Bodhisattvas  will  expiate  the  sins  which 
would  involve  them  in  births  and  deaths  during 
innumerable  kalpas.  How  much  more  will  the  re- 
membrance (of  Buddha  and  the  Bodhisattvas)  ! 

'  Know  that  he  who  remembers  that  Buddha  is  the 
white  lotus  (pu;/^arika)  among  men,  it  is  he  whom 
the  Bodhisattvas  Avalokite^vara  and  Mahasthama 
consider  an  excellent  friend.  He  will,  sitting  in  the 
Bodhi-maw^ala  2,  be  born  in  the  abode  of  Buddhas.' 


'  Sanskrit  karmSvarawa-vijuddhi. 

'  Bodhi-nia«</ala=Bodhi-ma«</a,  i.e.  the  Circle  of  Bodhi ;  'the 
round  terrace  of  enli,c;htcnmcnt,'  sec  Kern,  Saddharmapuw^arika, 
p.  155  note.  This  circle  is  the  ground  on  which  stood  the  Ajvattha 
tree  near  which  .Sakyamuni  defeated  the  assaults  of  Mara,  and  finally 
obtained  Budhi  or  enlightenment.  The  tree  is  called  Bodhidruma, 
the  ground  round  its  stem  the  bodhimam/ala.  In  the  Sad- 
dharmapunJarika   VII,   7,    it    is    called   Bodhima«</avara,   which 


§  33-     MEDITATION  ON  BUDDHA  AMITAYUS.      201 

Buddha  further  spoke  to  Ananda  :  '  Thou  shouldst 
carefully  remember  these  words.  To  remember  these 
words  is  to  remember  the  name  of  Buddha  Amitayus.' 

When  Buddha  concluded  these  words,  the  worthy 
disciples  Mahamaudgalyayana,  and  Ananda,  Vaidehi, 
and  the  others  were  all  enraptured  with  excessive 
joy. 

§33'  Thereupon  the  World-Honoured  One  came 
back,  walking  through  the  open  sky,  to  the  Mount 
Gri'dhrakH^a.  Ananda  soon  after  spoke  before  a 
great  assembly  of  all  the  occurrences  as  stated 
above.  On  hearing  this,  all  the  innumerable  Devas 
(gods),Nagas  (snakes),  and  Yakshas  (demi-gods)were 
inspired  with  great  joy;  and  having  worshipped  the 
Buddha  they  went  their  way. 

Here  ends  the  Sutra  of  the  Meditation  on  Buddha 
Amitayus,  spoken  by  Buddha  (.S"akyamuni). 

Dr.  Kern  translates  by  the  terrace  of  enlightenment,  vara  meaning 
circuit.  A  different  idea  is  expressed  by  bodhima;«/apa  in  the 
Buddha-z^arita  XIV,  90,  which  would  mean  a  hall  or  pavilion, 
unless  we  ouc^ht  to  read  here  also  bodhimawfl'ala. 


INDEX   OF  NAMES  AND    SUBJECTS 

IN    THE   AMITAYUR-DHYANA-StJTRA. 


Ahhu/jma.m,  page   192   note;    198 

note. 
A_§-atajatru,  16  r  ;  162  ;  164. 
Amitabha  (or  Amitayus),  166  ;  195. 
Amitayus  (or  Amitabha),  166  ;  167  ; 

169;     176;    180;     189;     195; 

198  ;  200  ;  201. 
Anagamin,  167. 
Ananda,    164;    165;    168;    179,  et 

passim. 
Anantarya  sins,  p.  198  note. 
Anutpatikadharmakshanti,  169  note. 
Anuttarasawyaksawbodhi,  191. 
Arhat,  178  ;  195. 
Arhatghata,  197  note. 
Asankhya  kalpas,  185. 
Avaivartya,  191. 
Avalokitejvara,  176,  et  passim. 

Bhagavat,     see     World-Honoured 

One. 
Bhikshus,  161  ;  175;  177;   189. 
Bimbisara,  161  ;  167. 
Bodhi,  168;  191;  196;    197;    199; 

the  circle  of,  200  note. 
Bodhi-ma«^ala,  200. 
Bodhisattvas,  161,  et  passim, 
Brahma-ma«i,  176. 
Brahman  (god),  165  ;  172. 
Brute  creation,  165  ;  182  note;  184. 
Buddha,  spiritual  body  of,  178  ;  the 

height   of   Buddha  5akyaniuni, 

187  ;  the  charity  of,  188. 

Chiliocosm,  173 ;  180. 

Depravities  (five),  165  note. 
Devadatta,  161  ;  165. 
Dharawi,  190. 


Dharmadhatu-kaya,  178. 
Dharmakara,  177  ;  194. 

Enlightenment,  the  round  terrace  of, 

200. 
Existence,  the  five  paths  of,  182  ; 

non-,  171  ;  174;  193. 

Five  deadly  sins,  192  ;   197  note. 

Gambudvipa,  165. 

Gambunada  (gold),  173;  176;   178; 

i8o  ;  182. 
Gahga,  180. 

Garlands,  162  ;  163,  et  passim. 
Giva,  famous  physician,  163  ;  164. 
Gr/dhraku^i,  161  ;    162;   164;   201. 

Hardy  (Spence),  187  note. 
Hells,  165;   182  note;   184. 
Hungry  spirits  (Pretas),   165  ;    183 
note. 

Impermanence,  171  ;  174;  193. 
Indra,  165  ;   173. 

Kalayajas,  a  5rama«a  from  India, 

161. 
ATaw^ala,  164. 
ATandraprabha,     minister     of    king 

Bimbisara,  163. 
Karma,  183  ;  200. 
Karmavarawa-vijuddhi,  200  note. 
IC-ko    (Chisha-daishi    of    Ten-dai), 

161  note. 
Kiwjuka,  176. 
ATintamawi,  174  note. 
Kshanti  (Anutpatikadharma-),  169. 


204 


amitayur-dhvana-sOtra. 


Kshatriyas  (the  kingly  race),  163. 
Kumarabhuta,  161  note. 

Lapis  lazuli,  169,  ct  passim. 

Law,  prince  of  the,  161  ;  remem- 
brance of  the,  174;  eternal 
Law,  169  note. 

Mahamaiidgalyayana  (mokuren), 
162  ;  163 ;  164  ;  165  ;  201. 

Mahasthama,  176;  named  Unlimited 
Light,  184,  et  passim. 

Mahavyutpatti,  197  note. 

Mahayana,  168  ;  1S8  ;  190  ;  191 ; 
195;   197. 

Mahejvara  Deva,  166. 

Ma«5^ujri,  161. 

^L^rks  (minor),  174. 

Rlatr/ghata,  197  note. 

Meditation,  167,  et  passim. 

Naga,  201. 

Nirvawa,  167;   169;   194. 
Noble  Truths  (the  four),  193. 
Non-existence,  171  ;  174  ;   193. 
Non-self,  171  ;  174  ;  193. 

Padma  (lotus),  184. 

Paramita,  174. 

Pitr/'ghata,  197  note. 

Prayer,  of  Dharmakara,  177  ;  mystic 

form  of,  190;    the  forty-eight, 

194. 
Precepts,  the  eight  prohibitive,  162  ; 

192  ;   the  ten   prohibitive,  167 

note  ;  the  five  prohibitive,  192. 
Pretas,  165  ;   184. 
PuWarlka,  200. 
Pur;;a  (Furuna),  162. 

Rhgagrihi,  161. 

Remembrance  (sixfold),  188  ;  of  the 

Buddha,  174,  et  passim. 
Resignation  (spirit  of),  169  ;    181  ; 

189;  191;   199. 


SaddharmapuWarika,  161;  200  note. 
5akra  (Indra),  165;   173;   176. 
5akrabhilagnamawiratna,  173  note. 
5akyamuni,  165  ;  1S2  ;  the  height  of, 

187  note ;  201. 
Samadhi,  171  ;   181  ;  191  ;   199. 
Sanghabhcda,  197  note. 
Sahghika  labha,  196. 
iSatadharmavidyadvara,     192;      196 

(where  the  Sanskrit  is  omitted). 
Scriptures,  the  twelve  divisions  of, 

186;   195. 
Shan-tao  (Jen-do  Daishi),  162  ;  163 

note. 
Signs  of  perfection,  174  ;   178. 
Siva,  166. 
Spells,  163. 
S'ramawas,  163. 
^ramawera  (a  novice),  193. 
5ravakas,  189. 
Srota-apanna,  194. 
Sufferings,   the   five  worldly,    169  ; 

171  ;  174;   193- 
Sukhavati,  166;    167;    168;    171; 

175;   185;  200, 
Sumeru,  166 ;   177  ;   180. 

Tathagata  (Nyo-rai),  164;  178;  187. 
Tathagatasyantike       dush/a/tittaru- 

dhirotpadana,  197  note. 
Three  Jewels   (Ratna-traya),   167  ; 

188  note  ;   196. 

Ushnishajiraskata,  182. 

Vaidehi,  consort  of  Bimbisara,  161; 

164,  et  passim. 
Vaipulya  Sutra,  188  ;  190;   195. 
Veda,  163. 

World-Honoured  One,  162;  164, 
et  passim,  being  a  translation  of 
Bhagavat,  the  Blessed  One. 

Yaksha,  201. 
Yama,  177  ;  180. 


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL    ALPHABETS. 


20: 


-^    5      •     •     • 


n  n  '^  '^  o- 


n  22  c  P^  C 


D 


'O 


"   -    U  oJU 


iJo^ 


D  :S 


'0 


«    _    UoJU 


ki) 


W-oJ 


^  q    *iOvf 


S 


,^  avoj 


♦X^ 


:J    • 


If   I5   P   [y 


K>     ru/ 


pr  IP  Pr  H>^  pr 


^  :S    bD-^   cr 


bO 

c 


-JS   ^     :«    J3 


03 

PI 


o3 
O 

■-3 
o 

S 


Cm    c     a. 


Eh         2         O 

.-H      W       CO       TJ<       O 


03     ^ 
n 

3 


a. 


a  ^   d  ^ 


^. 


t^    00    0}    o    ^ 


CO    f    o    «o    t>. 


206  TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL    ALPIIALETS 


5! 

>» 

;     ;    H         *-    :S     ••••    c  -,     i     ".„!,,•%    ; 

» 

' 

•    .        n;  q    .  r  r    .  ^j^    '.    '.  .d  d  -  m    * 

Arabic 

^. 

*5   ;        D    .  0  '>    •  •'»   D-D    '.    i  5    !  .^  -ij   ; 

c 

5 

'D. 

'b  *•>>        D     •  0   -»     •  o    D-D    .*    ivi    '.'d.  \'\ 

*> 

•      •         Cn     '      •            •            •      • 

e 

N 

init. 

-Tvf 

,  ^  -%       e<\3    ;  <^^  •  ^  •    .    •  g    •  ^   .    . 

5 

»y 

tr'           tc^-hrfrirrttlg*.    ipi 

•    • 

c 
c 
< 

< 

>■ 

< 
r. 

0 

? 

i 

i 

•      • 

•    ? 

•    a 

'.••■'is 

•4 

a 

'3  '3  *•  *• 

.    .    . 

.    !    ! 

.  :  ^  i  .*  !  . 

•        * 

(J 

►. 

-:S.'a;^.c--.!aj.N^! 

in 

(- 
Z 
< 

o 
r. 

8 

^ 

^ 

X 

•  —                         to 

15                <« 
^               1 

<a                    Q 

00                       05 

•1                           rH 

o 

S    3 

•i    ^ 

lis 

S  .2    5     • 

»-  fi  : 

.     .         "5 

"      «             c 
— 1    C»               CO 

.h    -a 
c  ■«      • 
f)     »)      . 

at      cd 

.5 

^     »0     CO 
M     W     N 

•      OS 

S    S    ; 

"a 
-      ^     S 

t^      00      02 
CM     W     W 

•  —1     (M        .        . 

•  .2     2      •      •      « 
■    "c     *?    <-l    W 

'    S    E    J3    -   .2 
•  2                Br   sr   ^ 

E         :l    -  5 

a>                      a. 

O     —1     CM     CO     Tj<     «5 
CO     CO     CO     CO     CO     CO 

-I     C^ 

m      n 
3      3 
E      E 

•C    'C 
k.     b 

S    3 

to    r^ 

CO     CO 

FOR    THE   SACRED    BOOKS   OF    THE   EAST. 


207 


_a  .:a 


-a  ^ 


•^ 


<^ 


a  c\  r\  n 


^ 


1 


n 


1    - 


5)  <^ 


:  :c^ 


^ 


8- 


^ 


^s   ^ 


»)^ 


•o  to  h»  h?  ^  t^ 


tr  (f  IB-  » 


rr-p  |j 


■«   =e     8      •    *• 


S    ■« 


p.-a-^  :§ 


&         ^       «4-.         > 


tcl 


^ 


Ti 

0 

r/i 

a 

^ 

0) 

00 

0 

1 

bO 

d 

3, 

0 

n 

03    rS 


m     c 

s  ^ 


Hi 


.2         ^    > 


."JJ  Irt  v^         <U  I— I 

H         2         ^   cc  CO 

00C5O'-i(M0^Tril0C0t>. 

CO    CO    ^    ^    ^    ^    ^    ^    ^    Tf 


H    Zi    O! 


rt 

m 

t4 

03 

•        C/3 

cd 

.22 

OS 
•      0 

d 

OJ 

2  <!3  eS 

S  >  to 

rS  „     CO  H 

'£,  c  .22 

cc  <  > 


OOOO^^WeOrtHlOCOt^OOOS 


208 


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL    ALPHABETS. 


2 

XS 

ej     <33     —     <— 

3  <3    0  «D  ;5  ' .    . 

0  •  ^  • 

-.3 

1 

I"  : 

1'      k     |-'|-       ■ 

I--  \- 1:  •;  ; 

l.;^  :  : 

1  !■•  : 

<     1    .     . 

'1  ^  1.  ij, : 

H-J,  \  Jib  : 

- 

c         •     • 

'1   ^    h    'D' 

H-i,  :  \is  \ 

■  0  ^ 

- 

B. 

•  • 

;  ^     ;   0    •     ; 

-  : 

-d 
N 

• 

•   :?    ?    -^  ^ 

to  -^ 

5 

.'    P    ^    h*-^r  |«?   le**  IP*  f??'  fp    ff5      i    IV  .fc 

l^-^F 

B 
< 

>• 
a. 

< 

■A 

0 

u 

!...*. 

•     • 

1/ 

.     a      .    ^ 

■    ■  S  •  -i-  !1 

S  J^ 

1 

S 

u 

^         ^  S"         '3         '3^  'a" 
0   w   >o    oj  <d  —   <-   i::   '^   -j:   'n    3   <3    «  ^5.  irt   ^  3   0  .5  <3  ^  ^  -■*   =-   -   ••= 

ri 

5 
> 

CO 

^3 

^ 

„            a 

^^3                       S 

.       2                  in                               ...                                                  OJ                 *i                          -^ 

ifll^iiiil^lli.l    i 

3>.:s-^tc'^'>2"^         'H,               ^ 
oa3'3<u.5rt3-^               : 

*      *    .2 
*    "5 

:  :  ^ 

=           bo                t 

2                   CD                               I 

5          3               «i 
d            bo                 „ 
■■      «    c                .- 
5     "   2             "^ 
3        1     .    .J 

?         Q               C 

r5    0     — '     (M    CO     T} 
1     CM     CM     CM     <N     CV 

3   t 

c 

i  ^ 

i    .H 
>      « 

!    ft. 
«    w 

1     CV 

!      e 
i     t 
.      « 

"' 
a 

>    « 

1      Cv 

« 

"    T 

5        0 

:     (^ 

J      3 

J     0 
1    CM 

Sacred  Books  of  the  East 

TRANSLATED   BY 

VARIOUS   ORIENTAL  SCHOLARS 

AND   EDITED   BY 

F.      MAX     MXJLLKR 

*^*    T/iis  Series  is  piiblislicd  -with  the  sanction  and  co-operation  of  the  Secretary  of 
State  for  India  in  Council. 

BEFOST    presented   to   tlie  ACADEMIE   DES    INSCBIPTIOITS,    May  11, 
1883,  by  T&.  ERNEST  BENAN. 

'  M.  Renan  presente  trois  nouveaux  une  seconde,  dont  I'interet  historiqiie  et 
volumes  de  la  grande  collection  des  religieux  ne  sera  pas  moindie.  M.  Max 
"  Livres  sacres  de  I'Orieiit"  (Sacred  Miiller  a  su  se  procurer  la  collaboration 
Books  of  the  East),  que  dirige  h.  Oxford,  des  savans  les  plus  eminens  d'Europe  et 
avec  une  si  vaste  erudition  et  une  critique  d'Asie.  L'Universite  d'Oxford,  que  cette 
si  sure,  le  savant  associe  de  TAcademie  grande  ])ublication  honore  au  plus  haut 
des  Inscriptions,  M.  Max  Miiller.  ...  La  degre,  doit  tenir  a  continuer  dans  les  plus 
premiere  serie  de  ce  beau  recueil,  com-  larges  proportions  une  ceuvre  aussi  philo- 
posee  de  24  volumes,  est  presque  achevee.  sophiquement  confue  que  savamment 
M.  Max  Miiller  se  propose  d'en  publier      executee.' 

EXTBACT  from  the  QUABTEBI.Y  REVIEW. 

'We  rejoice  to  notice  that  a  second  great  edition  of  the  Rig-Veda,  can  corn- 
series  of  tliese  translations  has  been  an-  jDare  in  importance  or  in  usefulness  with 
noviced  and  has  actually  begun  to  appear.  this  English  translation  of  the  Sacred 
The  stones,  at  least,  out  of  whicli  a  stately  Books  of  the  East,  which  lias  been  devised 
edifice  may  hereafter  arise,  are  here  being  by  his  foresight,  successfully  brought  so 
brought  together.  Prof.  Max  Miiller  has  far  by  his  persuasive  and  organising 
deserved  well  of  scientific  history.  Not  power,  and  will,  we  trust,  by  the  assist- 
a  few  minds  owe  to  his  enticing  words  ance  of  the  distinguished  scholars  he  has 
their  first  attraction  to  this  branch  of  gathered  round  him,  be  carried  in  due 
study.     But  no  work  of  his,  not  even  the  time  to  a  happy  completion.' 

Professor  E.  HABDY,  Xnaurural  I^ecture  in  the  University  of  rreitourgf,  1887. 

'  Die  allgemeine  vergleichende  Reli-  internationalen  Orientalistencongress  in 
gionswissenschaft  datirt  von  jenem  gross-  London  der  Grundstein  gelegt  worden 
artigen,  in  seiner  Art  einzig  dastehenden  war,  die  tJbersetzung  der  heiligen  Biicher 
Unternehmeu,  zu  welchem  auf  Anregung  des  Oslens'  {tJie  Sacred  Books  of  the 
Max    Miillers   im   Jahre    1874  auf   dem      East). 

The  Hon.  AI.BEBT  S.  O.  CAlTiriNO  '  Words  on  Existing-  Beligions.' 

'  The  recent  publication  of  the  "  Sacred  a  great  event  in  the  annals  of  theological 
Works  of  the  East"  in  English  is  surely       liteiature.' 


Oxford 

AT    THE     CLARENDON    PRESS 
LONDON:    HENRY  FROWDE 

OXFORD   UNIVERSITY   PRESS   WAREHOUSE,   AMEN   CORNER,   F.C. 


SACRED  nOOk'S  or  THE  EAST. 


FIRST    SERIES. 

Vol.  I.     The  Upanishads, 

Translated  by  F.  Max  Miller.  Part  I.  The  A'Mndogyn- 
upanishad,  The  Talavakara-upanishad,  The  Aitareya-ara«yaka, 
The  Kaushitaki-brahmawa-upanishad,  and  The  Va^saneyi- 
sawihila-ujianishad.     8vo,  cloth,  los.  6 J. 

The  Upanishads  contain  the  philosophy  of  the  Veda.  They  have 
become  the  foundation  of  the  later  Veddnta  doctrines,  and  indirectly 
of  Buddhism.  Schopenhauer,  speaking  of  the  Upanishads,  says : 
*  In  the  ivhole  ivorld  there  is  no  study  so  beneficial  and  so  elevating 
as  that  of  the  Upanishads.  It  has  been  the  solace  of  my  life,  it  ivill 
be  the  solace  of  my  death'. 

[See  also  Vol.  XV.] 

Vol.  II.    The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas, 

As  taught  in  the  Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  Vasish///a, 
and  Baudhayana.  Translated  by  Georg  BOhler.  Part  I. 
Apastamba  and  Gautama.     8vo,  cloth,  \os.  6d. 

The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas  contain  the  original  treatises  on 
ivhich  the  Laws  of  Manu  and  other  lawgivers  were  founded. 

[See  also  Vol.  XIV.] 

Vol.  III.    The  Sacred  Books  of  China. 

The  Texts  of  Confucianism.  Translated  by  James  Legge. 
Part  I.  The  Shu  King,  The  Religious  Portions  of  the  Shih 
King,  and  The  Hsiao  King.     8vo,  cloth,  i  2^.  dd. 

Confucius  was  a  collector  of  ancient  traditions,  not  the  founder  of 
a  new  religion.     As  he  lived  in  the  sixth  and  fifth  centuries  B.C. 
his  works  are  of  unique  interest  for  the  study  of  Ethology. 
[See  also  Vols.  XVI,  XXVII,  XXVIII,  XXXIX,  and  XL.] 

Vol.  IV.    The  Zend-Avesta. 

Translated  by  James  Darmesteter.  Pan  I.  The  Vendidad. 
Svo,  cloth,  ID  J.  td. 

The  Zend-Avesta  contains  the  relics  of  ivhat  was  the  religion  of 
Cyrus,  Darius,  iuul  Xerxes,  and,  I ul  fn-  the  battle  of  Alarathon, 


EDITED  BY  F.  A/AX  MULLETS. 


might  have  bcco?ne  the  religion  of  Europe.  J  I  forms  to  the  present 
day  the  sacred  book  of  the  Parsis,  the  so-called  fire-worshippers. 
Two  more  volumes  will  complete  the  translation  of  all  that  is  left  us 
of  Zoroaster* s  religion. 

[See  also  Vols.  XXIII  and  XXXI.] 

VOL.  V,     Pahlavi  Texts. 

Translated  by  E.  W.  West.     Part  I.     The  Bundahij,  Bahman 
Ya^'t,  and  Shayast  la-shayast,     8vo,  cloth,  1 2s.  6d. 

The  Pahlavi  Texts  comprise  the  theological  literature  of  the  revival 
of  Zoroaster  s  religion,  beginning  with  the  Sassanian  dynasty.  They 
are  important  for  a  study  of  Gnosticism, 

VOLS.  VI  AND  IX.    The  Quran. 

Parts  I  and  II.     Translated  by  E.  H.  Palmer.     8vo,  cloth,  2\s, 

This  translation,  carried  out  according  to  his  owti  peculiar  views 
of  the  origin  of  the  Qur'dn,  was  the  last  great  work  of  E.  H.  Pabner, 
before  he  ivas  murdered  iJi  Egypt. 

Vol.  VII.    The  Institutes  of  Vish;^u. 

Translated  by  Julius  Jolly.     8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d. 

A  collection  of  legal  aphoristns,  closely  connected  with  one  of  the 
oldest  Vedic  schools,  the  Ka//^as,  hit  considerably  added  to  in  later 
time.     Of  importance  for  a  critical  study  of  the  Laws  of  Manu. 

Vol.  VIII.   The  Bhagavadgita,wlth  The  Sanatsu^atiya, 
and  The  Anugita. 

Translated   by   Kashinath    Trimbak    Telang.      Svo,   cloth, 
\os.  6d. 

The  earliest  philosophical  and  religious  poe?n  of  India.  It  has  bee?i 
paraphrased  i7i  A  mold'' s  'Song  Celestial.' 

Vol.  X.    The  Dhammapada, 

Translated  from  Pali  by  F.  Max  Muller  ;  and 

The  Sutta-Nipata, 

Translated  from  Pali  by  V.  Fausboll  ;  being  Canonical  Books 
of  the  Buddhists.     Svo,  cloth,  los.  6d. 

The  Dhammapada  contains  the  quintessence  of  Buddhist  morality. 
The  Sutta-Nipdta  gives  the  authentic  leaching  of  Buddha  on  some 
of  the  fundamental  principles  of  religion. 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST. 


VOL.  XI.     Buddhist  Suttas. 

Translated  from  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids,  i.  The  Maha- 
parinibbana  Suttanta ;  2.  The  Dhamma-X-akka-ppavattana 
Sutla.  3.  The  Tevi^^i;'a  Suttanta ;  4.  The  Akankheyya  Sutta ; 
5.  The  A'etokhila  Sutta;  6.  The  Maha-sudassana  Suttanta; 
7.  The  Sabbasava  Sutta.     8vo,  cloth,  io.y.  6d. 

A  collection  of  the  most  important  religious,  moral,  and  philosophical 
discourses  taken  from  the  sacred  canon  of  the  Buddhists. 

Vol.  XII.     The  6'atapatha-Brdhma;/a,  according  to  the 
Text  of  the  Mddhyandina  School. 

Translated  by  Julius  Eggeling.  Part  I.  Books  I  and  II. 
8vo,  cloth,  1 2 J.  6</. 

A    minute  account  of  the  sacrificial  ceremonies  of  the   Vcdic  age. 
It  contains  the  earliest  account  of  the  Deluge  in  India. 
[See  also  Vols.  XXVI,  XLI.j 

VOL.  XIII.    Vinaya  Texts. 

Translated  from  the  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann 
Oldenberg.  Part  I.  The  Pdtimokkha.  The  IMahSvagga,  I-IV. 
8vo,  cloth,  loj.  dd. 

The  Vinaya  Texts  give  for  the  first  time  a  translatioti  of  the  moral 
code  of  the  Buddhist  religion  as  settled  in  the  third  century  B.  C. 
[See  also  Vols.  XVII  and  XX.] 

Vol.  XIV.     The  Sacred  La\vs  of  the  Aryas, 

As  taught  in  the  Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  Vasish//^a, 
and  liaudhayana.  Translated  by  Geokg  BUhler.  Part  II. 
VasishMa  and  Baudhayana.     Svo,  cloth,  lox.  6d. 

Vol.  XV.    The  Upanishads. 

Translated  by  F.  Max  MI'ller.  Part  II.  The  Ka///a-upanishad, 
The  Mu«</aka-upanishad,  The  Taittirtyaka-upanishad,  The 
Br/Tiadarawyaka-upanishad,  The  iSvetajvatara-upanishad,  The 
Praj;7a-upanishad,  and  The  Maitrayawa-brShmawa-upanishad. 
Svo,  cloth,  los.  6d. 

Vol.  XVI.    The  Sacred  Books  of  China. 

The  Texts  of  Confucianism.     Translated  by  James  Legge. 
Part  II.     The  Yi  King.     Svo,  cloth,  los.  6d. 
[.Sec  also  Vols.  XXVII,  XXVIII.] 

Vol.  XVII.    Vinaya  Texts. 

Translated  from  the  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann 
Oldenberg.  Part  II.  The  Mahavagga  V-X.  The  A'ullavagga, 
I-III.     8vo,  rioth,  loj.  6d. 


EDITED  BY  F.  MAX  MDLLER. 


VOL.  XVIII.     Pahlavi  Texts. 

Translated  by  E.  W.  Wkst.  Part  II.  The  Da</istan-i  Dinik 
and  The  Epistles  of  Man<jj>tiliar.     8vo,  cloth,  1 2s.  6d. 

Vol.  XIX.     The  Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king. 

A  Life  of  Buddha  by  Ajvaghosha  Bodhisattva,  translated  from 
Sanskrit  into  Chinese  by  Dharmaraksha,  a.d.  420,  and  from 
Chinese  into  English  by  Samuel  Beal.     8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d. 

This  life  of  Buddha  was  translated  from  Sanskrit  into  Chinese, 
A.D.  420.  //  contains  many  legends,  some  of  which  show  a  certain 
similarity  to  the  Evatigeliu?n  infaritiae,  Sfc. 

Vol.  XX.    Vinaya  Texts. 

Translated  from  the  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann 
Oldenberg.  Part  III.  The -ffullavagga,  IV-XII.  8 vo,  cloth, 
\os.  6d. 

Vol.  XXI.    The  Saddharma-pu?/^arika ;  or,  The  Lotus 
of  the  True  Law. 

Translated  by  H.  Kern.     8vo,  cloth,  12^.  6d. 
'  The  Lotus  of  the  true  Laiv,'  a  canonical  book  of  the  Northern 
Buddhists,  translated  from  Sanskrit.     There  is  a  Chinese  transla- 
tion of  this  book  which  was  finished  as  early  as  the  year  286  A.D. 

Vol.  XXII.     6^aiiia-Sutras. 

Translated  from  Prakrit  by  Hermann  Jacobi.  Part  I.  The 
A>^arahga-Sutra  and  The  Kalpa-Sfitra.     8vo,  cloth,  10^.  dd. 

The  religion  of  the  Cainas  was  founded  by  a  co7itemporary  of  Buddha. 
It  still  counts  numerous  adherents  in  Itidia,  while  there  are  no 
Buddhists  left  in  India  proper. 
Part  II,  in  preparation. 

VOL.  XXIII.    The  Zend-Avesta. 

Translated  by  James  Darmesteter.  Part  II.  The  Sirozahs, 
Yajts,  and  Nyayij.     8vo,  cloth,  \os.  6d. 

VOL.  XXIV.     Pahlavi  Texts. 

Translated  by  E.  W.  West.  Part  III.  Dina-i  Mainog- 
Khira</,  6'ikand-giimanik  Vi^^ar,  and  Sad  Dar.  8vo,  cloth, 
loj.  td. 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST: 


SECOND   SERIES. 

VOL.  XXV.     IManu. 

Translated  by  Georg  Buhler.  8vo,  cloth,  2\s. 
This  translation  is  founded  on  that  of  Sir  William  Jones,  which  has  been 
carefully  revised  and  corrected  with  the  help  of  seven  native  Commentaries. 
An  Appendix  contains  all  the  quotations  from  Manu  which  are  found  in  the 
Hindu  Law-books,  translated  for  the  use  of  the  Law  Courts  in  India. 
Another  Appendix  gives  a  synopsis  of  parallel  passajjes  from  the  six 
Dhanna-siitras,  the  other  Smrnis,  the  Upanishads,  the  Mahabharata,  &c. 

Vol.  XXVI.    The  .Satapatha-Brahma;^a. 

Translated  by  Julius  Eggeling.  Part  II.  Books  III  and  IV. 
8vo,  cloth,  12S.  dd. 

Vols,  xxvii  and  xxviii.  The  Sacred  Books  of  China. 
The  Texts  of  Confucianism.  Translated  by  James  Legge.  Parts 
III  and  IV.  The  Li  K\,  or  Collection  of  Treatises  on  the  Rules 
of  Propriety,  or  Ceremonial  Usages.    8vo,  cloth,  12s.  6d.  each. 

Vol.   XXIX.    The    GrzTiya-Siitras,     Rules    of    Vedic 
Domestic  Ceremonies. 

Part  I.  .Sankhayana,  Ajvalayana,  Paraskara,  Khadira.  Trans- 
lated by  Hermann  Oldenberg.     8vo,  cloth,  12s.  6J. 

These  rules  of  Domestic  Ceremonies  describe  the  home  life  of  the  ancient 
Aryas  with  a  completeness  and  accuracy  unmatched  in  any  other  literature. 
Some  of  these  rules  have  been  incorporated  in  the  ancient  Law-books. 

VOL.    XXX.     The    Gr/hya-Sutras,    Rules    of   Vedic 
Domestic  Ceremonies. 

Part  II.  Gobhila,  Hira«yakejin,  Apastamba.  Translated  by 
Hermann  Oldenberg.  Apastamba,  Ya^/7a-paribhasha-siiiras. 
Translated  by  F.  Max  Muller.     8vo,  cloth,  12s.  6c/. 

VOL.  XXXI.    The  Zend-Avesta. 

Part  IIL  The  Yasna,  Visparad,  Afrinagiin,  Giihs,  and 
Miscellaneous  Fragments.  Translated  by  L.  li.  Mills,  8vo, 
cloth,  1 2^.  6</. 

Vol.  XXXII.    Vedic  Hymns. 

Translated  by  F.  Max  IMI^lllk.     Part  I.     8vo,  cloth,  18s.  (uf. 


EDITED  BY  F.  MAX  MULLER. 


VOL.  XXXIII.    The  Minor  Law-books. 

Translated  by  Julius  Jolly.     Part  I.     Narada,  Br/liaspati. 
8vo,  cloth,  \os.  6d. 

Vol.  XXXIV.     The    Vedanta-Sutras,    with    the    Com- 
mentary by  ^'ahkara^arya.     Part  I. 

Translated  by  G.  Thibaut.     8vo,  cloth,  \2s.  6d. 

Vol.  XXXV.  The  Questions  of  King  Milinda.  Part  I. 
Translated  from  the  Pali  by  T.  W,  Rhys  Davids. 
8vo,  cloth,   I  OS.  6d. 

Vol.  XXXVI.  The  Questions  of  King  Milinda.  Part  1 1, 

[/«  //le  Pri'ss.^ 

Vol.  XXXVII.    The  Contents  of  the  Nasks,  as  stated 
in  the  Eighth  and  Ninth  Books  of  the  Dinkard. 
Part  I.     Translated  by  E.  W.  West.     8vo,  cloth,  i^s. 

VOL.  XXXVIII.     The  Vedanta-Sutras.     Part  II.     [/;^ 

///^  Press.^ 

Vols.  XXXIX  and  XL.     The  Sacred  Books  of  China. 

The  Texts  of  Taoism.     Translated  by  James  Legge.     8vo, 

cloth,   2  IS. 

VOL.  XLI.  The  6'atapatha-Brahma;2a.  Part  III.  Trans- 
lated by  Julius  Eggeling.     [/«  //le  Press.] 

Vol.  XLII.  The  Buddha-Z'arita.  Translated  by 
E.  B.  Cowell.  The  Sukhavati-vyflha.  Translated  by  F. 
Max  MI'ller.     [In  the  Press?^ 

VOLS.  XLIII  AND  XLIV.  The  6'atapatha-Brahma;/a. 
Parts  IV  and  V.     [In  preparation.] 

Vol.  XLV.     The  6^aina-Sutras.     Part  II.     [hi  prep ar- 

atmt.] 

Vol.   XL VI.      The   Vedanta-Sutras.      Part    III.     [In 

preparation.] 

Vol.  xlvii.  The  Contents  of  the  Nasks.  Part  II. 
[In  preparation .  ] 

VOL.  XLVIII.  Vedic  Hymns.   Part  II.  [In preparafion^ 


liECEXT  ORIENTAL    WORK'S. 


^ncctiota    (D.vonirnsia. 

ARYAN    SERIES. 

Buddhist  Texts  fj'om  Japan.  I.  Va^ra/'/'/iedika  ;  TJie 
Diamond-  Cutter. 

Edited  by  F.  Max  Miller,  M.A.     Small  410,  y.  6</. 
One  of  the  most  famous  metaphysical  treatises  of  the  Mnhayaim  Uudclhists. 

BtiddJiist  Texts  from  Japan.  II.  Sukhavati-Vyuha  : 
Descriptio7i  of  Sukhdvati,  the  Land  of  Bliss. 

Edited  by  F.  Max  Muller,  INI. A.,  and  Blxyiu  Nanjio.  With 
two  Apj^endices  :  (i)  Text  and  Translation  of  Sahghavarman's 
Chinese  Version  of  the  Poetical  Portions  of  the  Sukhavati- 
VyQha  ;  (2)  Sanskrit  Text  of  the  Smaller  Sukhavati-Vyuha. 
Small  4 to,  7 J.  td. 

The  editio  pHnceps  of  the  Sacred  Book  of  one  of  the  lartjest  and  most 
influential  sects  of  Buddhism,  numbering  more  than  ten  millions  of  followers 
in  Japan  alone. 

Buddhist  Texts  from  Japan.  III.  The  A  nciciit  Palm- 
Leaves  containing  the  Pra^;H-Paramita-H;7'daya- 
Sutra  and  the  Ush;/isha-Vi('aya-Dhara/^i. 

Edited  by  F.  Max  Miller,  M.A,,  and  Bunyiu  Nanjio,  M.A. 
With  an  Appendix  by  G.  Buhler,  C.I.E.     With  many  Plates. 
Small  4to,  loj. 
Contains  facsimiles  of  the  oldest  Sanskrit  MS.  at  present  known. 

Dharma-Sawgraha,  an  Ancient  Coilectio?i  of  Buddhist 
Technical  Terms. 

Prepared  for  publication  by  Kenjiu  Kasawara,  a  Buddhist 
Priest  from  Japan,  and,  after  his  death,  edited  by  F.  Max 
Ml'LLER  and  H.  Wenzel.     Small  410,  7^.  6</. 

Katayana's  Sarvaniikramaw!  of  the  /?/gveda. 

With  Extracts  from  Sha^/gurujishya's  Commentary  entitled 
Vcdarihadipika.  Edited  by  A.  A.  Macdonell,  M.A.,  Ph.D.   1  (n. 


Oxford 

AT     THE     CE A  REN  DON     PRESS 
LONDON  :    HENRY   FROWDE 

OXFORD   UNIVKkSITY    I'RKS.S   WAREHOUSE,   AMEN   CORNER,   E.C. 


1J012  01 


099 


itj 


S468 


Date  Due 

^.' 

» 

~Tm 

MM»„„.           ,^ 

Mil           "1 

- 

jiih"T'P*T  / 1 

JUN 

L_:' 

^ 

;:'•■>  ;  'J 


'■■^■■-  .r  • 


P   •:.    I 


w::*  -  -i.:  '.T/^  •  ^  ■ 


